
==Price convergence==
Arbitrage has the effect of causing prices in different markets to converge. As a result of arbitrage, the currency exchange rates, the price of commodities, and the price of securities in different markets tend to converge. The speed at which they do so is a measure of market efficiency. Arbitrage tends to reduce price discrimination by encouraging people to buy an item where the price is low and resell it where the price is high (as long as the buyers are not prohibited from reselling and the transaction costs of buying, holding and reselling are small relative to the difference in prices in the different markets).

Arbitrage moves different currencies toward purchasing power parity. As an example, assume that a car purchased in the United States is cheaper than the same car in Canada. Canadians would buy their cars across the border to exploit the arbitrage condition. At the same time, Americans would buy US cars, transport them across the border, then sell them in Canada. Canadians would have to buy American Dollars to buy the cars; and Americans would have to sell the Canadian dollars they received in exchange. Both actions would increase demand for US Dollars and supply of Canadian Dollars. As a result, there would be an appreciation of the US currency. This would make US cars more expensive and Canadian cars less so until their prices were similar. On a larger scale, international arbitrage opportunities in commodities, goods, securities and currencies tend to change exchange rates until the purchasing power is equal.

In reality, most assets exhibit some difference between countries. These, transaction costs, taxes, and other costs provide an impediment to this kind of arbitrage. Similarly, arbitrage affects the difference in interest rates paid on government bonds issued by the various countries, given the expected depreciations in the currencies relative to each other (see interest rate parity).

==Risks==
Arbitrage transactions in modern securities markets involve fairly low day-to-day risks, but can face extremely high risk in rare situations, particularly financial crises, and can lead to bankruptcy. Formally, arbitrage transactions have negative skew – prices can get a small amount closer (but often no closer than 0), while they can get very far apart. The day-to-day risks are generally small because the transactions involve small differences in price, so an execution failure will generally cause a small loss (unless the trade is very big or the price moves rapidly). The rare case risks are extremely high because these small price differences are converted to large profits via leverage (borrowed money), and in the rare event of a large price move, this may yield a large loss.

The main day-to-day risk is that part of the transaction fails – execution risk. The main rare risks are counterparty risk and liquidity risk – that a counterparty to a large transaction or many transactions fails to pay, or that one is required to post margin and does not have the money to do so. 

In the academic literature, the idea that seemingly very low risk arbitrage trades might not be fully exploited because of these risk factors and other considerations is often referred to as limits to arbitrage. 

===Execution risk===
Generally it is impossible to close two or three transactions at the same instant; therefore, there is the possibility that when one part of the deal is closed, a quick shift in prices makes it impossible to close the other at a profitable price. However, this is not necessarily the case. Many exchanges and idbs allow multi legged trades (e.g. basis block trades on LIFFE). 

Competition in the marketplace can also create risks during arbitrage transactions. As an example, if one was trying to profit from a price discrepancy between IBM on the NYSE and IBM on the London Stock Exchange, they may purchase a large number of shares on the NYSE and find that they cannot simultaneously sell on the LSE. This leaves the arbitrageur in an unhedged risk position.

In the 1980s, risk arbitrage was common. In this form of speculation, one trades a security that is clearly undervalued or overvalued, when it is seen that the wrong valuation is about to be corrected by events. The standard example is the stock of a company, undervalued in the stock market, which is about to be the object of a takeover bid; the price of the takeover will more truly reflect the value of the company, giving a large profit to those who bought at the current price&mdash;if the merger goes through as predicted. Traditionally, arbitrage transactions in the securities markets involve high speed, high volume and low risk. At some moment a price difference exists, and the problem is to execute two or three balancing transactions while the difference persists (that is, before the other arbitrageurs act). When the transaction involves a delay of weeks or months, as above, it may entail considerable risk if borrowed money is used to magnify the reward through leverage. One way of reducing the risk is through the illegal use of inside information, and in fact risk arbitrage with regard to leveraged buyouts was associated with some of the famous financial scandals of the 1980s such as those involving Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky.

===Mismatch===

Another risk occurs if the items being bought and sold are not identical and the arbitrage is conducted under the assumption that the prices of the items are correlated or predictable; this is more narrowly referred to as a convergence trade. In the extreme case this is merger arbitrage, described below. In comparison to the classical quick arbitrage transaction, such an operation can produce disastrous losses.

===Counterparty risk===
As arbitrages generally involve future movements of cash, they are subject to counterparty risk: if a counterparty fails to fulfill their side of a transaction. This is a serious problem if one has either a single trade or many related trades with a single counterparty, whose failure thus poses a threat, or in the event of a financial crisis when many counterparties fail. This hazard is serious because of the large quantities one must trade in order to make a profit on small price differences.

For example, if one purchases many risky bonds, then hedges them with CDSes, profiting from the difference between the bond spread and the CDS premium, in a financial crisis the bonds may default and the CDS writer/seller may itself fail, due to the stress of the crisis, causing the arbitrageur to face steep losses.

===Liquidity risk===

Arbitrage trades are necessarily synthetic, leveraged trades, as they involve a short position. If the assets used are not identical (so a price divergence makes the trade temporarily lose money), or the margin treatment is not identical, and the trader is accordingly required to post margin (faces a margin call), the trader may run out of capital (if they run out of cash and cannot borrow more) and go bankrupt even though the trades may be expected to ultimately make money. In effect, arbitrage traders synthesize a put option on their ability to finance themselves. 

Prices may diverge during a financial crisis, often termed a "flight to quality"; these are precisely the times when it is hardest for leveraged investors to raise capital (due to overall capital constraints), and thus they will lack capital precisely when they need it most. 

==Types of arbitrage==
=== Merger arbitrage ===
Also called risk arbitrage, merger arbitrage generally consists of buying the stock of a company that is the target of a takeover while shorting the stock of the acquiring company.

Usually the market price of the target company is less than the price offered by the acquiring company.
The spread between these two prices depends mainly on the probability and the timing of the takeover being completed as well as the prevailing level of interest rates.

The bet in a merger arbitrage is that such a spread will eventually be zero, if and when the takeover is completed. The risk is that the deal "breaks" and the spread massively widens.

===Municipal bond arbitrage===
Also called municipal bond relative value arbitrage, municipal arbitrage, or just muni arb, this hedge fund strategy involves one of two approaches.

Generally, managers seek relative value opportunities by being both long and short municipal bonds with a duration-neutral book. The relative value trades may be between different issuers, different bonds issued by the same entity, or capital structure trades referencing the same asset (in the case of revenue bonds). Managers aim to capture the inefficiencies arising from the heavy participation of non-economic investors (i.e., high income "buy and hold" investors seeking tax-exempt income) as well as the "crossover buying" arising from corporations' or individuals' changing income tax situations (i.e., insurers switching their munis for corporates after a large loss as they can capture a higher after-tax yield by offsetting the taxable corporate income with underwriting losses). There are additional inefficiencies arising from the highly fragmented nature of the municipal bond market which has two million outstanding issues and 50,000 issuers in contrast to the Treasury market which has 400 issues and a single issuer. 

Second, managers construct leveraged portfolios of AAA- or AA-rated tax-exempt municipal bonds with the duration risk hedged by shorting the appropriate ratio of taxable corporate bonds. These corporate equivalents are typically interest rate swaps referencing Libor or SIFMA . The arbitrage manifests itself in the form of a relatively cheap longer maturity municipal bond, which is a municipal bond that yields significantly more than 65% of a corresponding taxable corporate bond. The steeper slope of the municipal yield curve allows participants to collect more after-tax income from the municipal bond portfolio than is spent on the interest rate swap; the carry is greater than the hedge expense. Positive, tax-free carry from muni arb can reach into the double digits. The bet in this municipal bond arbitrage is that, over a longer period of time, two similar instruments—municipal bonds and interest rate swaps—will correlate with each other; they are both very high quality credits, have the same maturity and are denominated in U.S. dollars. Credit risk and duration risk are largely eliminated in this strategy. However, basis risk arises from use of an imperfect hedge, which results in significant, but range-bound principal volatility. The end goal is to limit this principal volatility, eliminating its relevance over time as the high, consistent, tax-free cash flow accumulates. Since the inefficiency is related to government tax policy, and hence is structural in nature, it has not been arbitraged away.

Note, however, that many municipal bonds are callable, and that this imposes substantial additional risks to the strategy.

===Convertible bond arbitrage===
A convertible bond is a bond that an investor can return to the issuing company in exchange for a predetermined number of shares in the company.

A convertible bond can be thought of as a corporate bond with a stock call option attached to it.

The price of a convertible bond is sensitive to three major factors:

*interest rate. When rates move higher, the bond part of a convertible bond tends to move lower, but the call option part of a convertible bond moves higher (and the aggregate tends to move lower).
*stock price. When the price of the stock the bond is convertible into moves higher, the price of the bond tends to rise.
*credit spread. If the creditworthiness of the issuer deteriorates (e.g. rating downgrade) and its credit spread widens, the bond price tends to move lower, but, in many cases, the call option part of the convertible bond moves higher (since credit spread correlates with volatility).

Given the complexity of the calculations involved and the convoluted structure that a convertible bond can have, an arbitrageur often relies on sophisticated quantitative models in order to identify bonds that are trading cheap versus their theoretical value.

Convertible arbitrage consists of buying a convertible bond and hedging two of the three factors in order to gain exposure to the third factor at a very attractive price.

For instance an arbitrageur would first buy a convertible bond, then sell fixed income securities or interest rate futures (to hedge the interest rate exposure) and buy some credit protection (to hedge the risk of credit deterioration).
Eventually what he'd be left with is something similar to a call option on the underlying stock, acquired at a very low price.
He could then make money either selling some of the more expensive options that are openly traded in the market or delta hedging his exposure to the underlying shares.

===Depository receipts===
A depository receipt is a security that is offered as a "tracking stock" on another foreign market. For instance a Chinese company wishing to raise more money may issue a depository receipt on the New York Stock Exchange, as the amount of capital on the local exchanges is limited. These securities, known as ADRs (American Depositary Receipt) or GDRs (Global Depositary Receipt ) depending on where they are issued, are typically considered "foreign" and therefore trade at a lower value when first released. Many ADR's are exchangeable into the original security (known as fungibility) and actually have the same value. In this case there is a spread between the perceived value and real value, which can be extracted. Other ADR's that are not exchangeable often have much larger spreads. Since the ADR is trading at a value lower than what it is worth, one can purchase the ADR and expect to make money as its value converges on the original. However there is a chance that the original stock will fall in value too, so by shorting it one can hedge that risk.

===Dual-listed companies===
A dual-listed company (DLC) structure involves two companies incorporated in different countries contractually agreeing to operate their businesses as if they were a single enterprise, while retaining their separate legal identity and existing stock exchange listings. In integrated and efficient financial markets, stock prices of the twin pair should move in lockstep. In practice, DLC share prices exhibit large deviations from theoretical parity. Arbitrage positions in DLCs can be set up by obtaining a long position in the relatively underpriced part of the DLC and a short position in the relatively overpriced part. Such arbitrage strategies start paying off as soon as the relative prices of the two DLC stocks converge toward theoretical parity. However, since there is no identifiable date at which DLC prices will converge, arbitrage positions sometimes have to be kept open for considerable periods of time. In the meantime, the price gap might widen. In these situations, arbitrageurs may receive margin calls, after which they would most likely be forced to liquidate part of the position at a highly unfavorable moment and suffer a loss. Arbitrage in DLCs may be profitable, but is also very risky, see. Background material is available at .

A good illustration of the risk of DLC arbitrage is the position in Royal Dutch Shell—which had a DLC structure until 2005—by the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM, see also the discussion below). Lowenstein (2000) describes that LTCM established an arbitrage position in Royal Dutch Shell in the summer of 1997, when Royal Dutch traded at an 8 to 10 percent premium. In total $2.3 billion was invested, half of which long in Shell and the other half short in Royal Dutch (Lowenstein, p. 99). In the autumn of 1998 large defaults on Russian debt created significant losses for the hedge fund and LTCM had to unwind several positions. Lowenstein reports that the premium of Royal Dutch had increased to about 22 percent and LTCM had to close the position and incur a loss. According to Lowenstein (p. 234), LTCM lost $286 million in equity pairs trading and more than half of this loss is accounted for by the Royal Dutch Shell trade.

===Private to public equities===
The market prices for privately held companies are typically viewed from a return on investment perspective (such as 25%), whilst publicly held and or exchange listed companies trade on a Price to earnings ratio (P/E) (such as a P/E of 10, which equates to a 10% ROI). Thus, if a publicly traded company specialises in the acquisition of privately held companies, from a per-share perspective there is a gain with every acquisition that falls within these guidelines. Exempli gratia, Berkshire-Hathaway. A hedge fund that is an example of this type of arbitrage is Greenridge Capital, which acts as an angel investor retaining equity in private companies which are in the process of becoming publicly traded, buying in the private market and later selling in the public market. Private to public equities arbitrage is a term which can arguably be applied to investment banking in general. Private markets to public markets differences may also help explain the overnight windfall gains enjoyed by principals of companies that just did an initial public offering (IPO).

===Regulatory arbitrage===

Regulatory arbitrage is where a regulated institution takes advantage of the difference between its real (or economic) risk and the regulatory position. For example, if a bank, operating under the Basel I accord, has to hold 8% capital against default risk, but the real risk of default is lower, it is profitable to securitise the loan, removing the low risk loan from its portfolio. On the other hand, if the real risk is higher than the regulatory risk then it is profitable to make that loan and hold on to it, provided it is priced appropriately.

This process can increase the overall riskiness of institutions under a risk insensitive regulatory regime, as described by Alan Greenspan in his October 1998 speech on The Role of Capital in Optimal Banking Supervision and Regulation.

Regulatory Arbitrage was used for the first time in 2005 when it was applied by Scott V. Simpson, a partner at law firm Skadden, Arps, to refer to a new defence tactic in hostile mergers and acquisitions where differing takeover regimes in deals involving multi-jurisdictions are exploited to the advantage of a target company under threat.

In economics, regulatory arbitrage (sometimes, tax arbitrage) may be used to refer to situations when a company can choose a nominal place of business with a regulatory, legal or tax regime with lower costs. For example, an insurance company may choose to locate in Bermuda due to preferential tax rates and policies for insurance companies. This can occur particularly where the business transaction has no obvious physical location: in the case of many financial products, it may be unclear "where" the transaction occurs.

Regulatory arbitrage can include restructuring a bank by outsourcing services such as IT. The outsourcing company takes over the installations, buying out the bank's assets and charges a periodic service fee back to the bank. This frees up cashflow usable for new lending by the bank. The bank will have higher IT costs, but counts on the multiplier effect of money creation and the interest rate spread to make it a profitable exercise.

Example:
Suppose the bank sells its IT installations for 40 million USD. With a reserve ratio of 10%, the bank can create 400 million USD in additional loans (there is a time lag, and the bank has to expect to recover the loaned money back into its books). The bank can often lend (and securitize the loan) to the IT services company to cover the acquisition cost of the IT installations. This can be at preferential rates, as the sole client using the IT installation is the bank. If the bank can generate 5% interest margin on the 400 million of new loans, the bank will increase interest revenues by 20 million. The IT services company is free to leverage their balance sheet as aggressively as they and their banker agree to. This is the reason behind the trend towards outsourcing in the financial sector. Without this money creation benefit, it is actually more expensive to outsource the IT operations as the outsourcing adds a layer of management and increases overhead.

===Telecom arbitrage===

Telecom arbitrage companies allow phone users to make international calls for free through certain access numbers. Such services are offered in the United Kingdom; the telecommunication arbitrage companies get paid an interconnect charge by the UK mobile networks and then buy international routes at a lower cost. The calls are seen as free by the UK contract mobile phone customers since they are using up their allocated monthly minutes rather than paying for additional calls.

Such services were previously offered in the United States by companies such as FuturePhone.com. These services would operate in rural telephone exchanges, primarily in small towns in the state of Iowa. In these areas, the local telephone carriers are allowed to charge a high "termination fee" to the caller's carrier in order to fund the cost of providing service to the small and sparsely populated areas that they serve. However, FuturePhone (as well as other similar services) ceased operations upon legal challenges from AT&T and other service providers. 

===Statistical arbitrage===

Statistical arbitrage is an imbalance in expected nominal values. A casino has a statistical arbitrage in every game of chance that it offers—referred to as the house advantage, house edge, vigorish or house vigorish.

==The debacle of Long-Term Capital Management==

Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) lost 4.6 billion U.S. dollars in fixed income arbitrage in September 1998. LTCM had attempted to make money on the price difference between different bonds. For example, it would sell U.S. Treasury securities and buy Italian bond futures. The concept was that because Italian bond futures had a less liquid market, in the short term Italian bond futures would have a higher return than U.S. bonds, but in the long term, the prices would converge. Because the difference was small, a large amount of money had to be borrowed to make the buying and selling profitable.

The downfall in this system began on August 17, 1998, when Russia defaulted on its ruble debt and domestic dollar debt. Because the markets were already nervous due to the Asian financial crisis, investors began selling non-U.S. treasury debt and buying U.S. treasuries, which were considered a safe investment. As a result the price on US treasuries began to increase and the return began decreasing because there were many buyers, and the return (yield) on other bonds began to increase because there were many sellers (i.e. the price of those bonds fell). This caused the difference between the prices of U.S. treasuries and other bonds to increase, rather than to decrease as LTCM was expecting. Eventually this caused LTCM to fold, and their creditors had to arrange a bail-out. More controversially, officials of the Federal Reserve assisted in the negotiations that led to this bail-out, on the grounds that so many companies and deals were intertwined with LTCM that if LTCM actually failed, they would as well, causing a collapse in confidence in the economic system. Thus LTCM failed as a fixed income arbitrage fund, although it is unclear what sort of profit was realized by the banks that bailed LTCM out.

==Etymology==
"Arbitrage" is a French word and denotes a decision by an arbitrator or arbitration tribunal. (In modern French, "" usually means referee or umpire.) In the sense used here it is first defined in 1704 by Mathieu de la Porte in his treatise "" as a consideration of different exchange rates to recognize the most profitable places of issuance and settlement for a bill of exchange ("".) See "Arbitrage" in Trésor de la Langue Française. 

==See also==
===Types of financial arbitrage===
* Arbitrage betting
* Covered interest arbitrage
* Fixed income arbitrage
* Political arbitrage
* Risk arbitrage
* Statistical arbitrage
* Triangular arbitrage
* Uncovered interest arbitrage
* Volatility arbitrage

===Related concepts===
* Algorithmic trading
* Arbitrage pricing theory
* Coherence (philosophical gambling strategy), analogous concept in Bayesian probability
* Efficient market hypothesis
* Immunization (finance)
* Interest rate parity
* Intermediation
* No free lunch with vanishing risk
* TANSTAAFL
* Value investing

==Notes==

==References==

*Greider, William (1997). One World, Ready or Not. Penguin Press. ISBN 0-7139-9211-5.
*Special Situation Investing: Hedging, Arbitrage, and Liquidation, Brian J. Stark, Dow-Jones Publishers. New York, NY 1983. ISBN 0870943847; ISBN 9780870943843

==External links==

*What is Arbitrage? (About.com)
*ArbitrageView.com – Arbitrage opportunities in pending merger deals in the U.S. market
* Information on arbitrage in dual-listed companies on the website of Mathijs A. van Dijk.
*What is Regulatory Arbitrage. Regulatory Arbitrage after the Basel ii framework and the 8th Company Law Directive of the European Union.
*Institute for Arbitrage.



[[ACF Fiorentina]]

ACF Fiorentina, commonly referred to as simply Fiorentina, is a professional Italian football club from Florence, Tuscany. Founded by a merger in 1926, Fiorentina have played at the top level of Italian football for the majority of their existence; only four clubs have played in more Serie A seasons. 

Fiorentina have won two Italian Championships, in 1955–56 and again in 1968–69, as well as winning six Coppa Italia trophies and one Italian Super Cup. On the European stage, Fiorentina won the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1960–61 and lost the final one year later. They finished runners-up in the 1956–57 European Cup, losing against Real Madrid, and also came close to winning the UEFA Cup, finishing as runners-up in the 1989–90 season.

Since 1931, the club have played at the Stadio Artemio Franchi, which currently has a capacity of 47,282. The stadium has used several names over the years and has undergone several renovations. Fiorentina are known widely by the nickname Viola, a reference to their distinctive purple colours.

==History==

===Foundation to World War II===
The monumental entrance of the stadium, the same as in 1931 except for the inscription
Associazione Calcio Fiorentina was founded in the autumn of 1926 by local noble and National Fascist Party member Luigi Ridolfi, who initiated the merger of two older Florentine clubs, CS Firenze and PG Libertas. The aim of the merger was to give Florence a strong club to rival those of the more dominant Italian Football Championship sides of the time from Northwest Italy. Also influential was the cultural revival and rediscovery of Calcio Fiorentino, an ancestor of modern football that was played by members of the Medici family. 

After a rough start and three seasons in lower leagues, Fiorentina reached the Serie A in 1931. That same year saw the opening of the new stadium, originally named Giovanni Berta, after a prominent fascist, but now known as Stadio Artemio Franchi. At the time, the stadium was a masterpiece of engineering, and its inauguration was monumental. In order to be able to compete with the best teams in Italy, Fiorentina strengthened their team with some new players, notably the Uruguayan Pedro Petrone, nicknamed el Artillero. Despite enjoying a good season and finishing in fourth place, Fiorentina were relegated the following year, although they would return quickly to Serie A. In 1941 they won their first Coppa Italia, but the team were unable to build on their success during the 1940s because of World War II and other troubles.

===First scudetto and '50–'60s===
The first Italian champion Fiorentina
In 1950 Fiorentina started to achieve consistent top-five finishes in the domestic league. The team consisted of great players such as well-known goalkeeper Giuliano Sarti, Sergio Cervato, Francesco Rosella, Guido Gratton, Giuseppe Chiappella and Aldo Scaramucci, but above all the attacking duo of Brazilian Julinho and Argentinian Miguel Montuori. This team won Fiorentina's first scudetto (Italian championship) in 1955–56, 12 points ahead of second-place Milan. Milan beat Fiorentina to top spot the following year, but more significantly Fiorentina became the first Italian team to play in a European Cup final, when a disputed penalty led to a 2–0 defeat at the hands of by Alfredo di Stéfano's Real Madrid.
Fiorentina were runners-up again in the three subsequent seasons. In the 1960–61 season the club won the Coppa Italia again and was also successful in Europe, winning the first Cup Winners' Cup against Rangers.

After several years of runner-up finishes, Fiorentina dropped away slightly in the 1960s, bouncing from 4th to 6th place, although the club won the Coppa Italia and the Mitropa Cup in 1966.

===Second scudetto and '70s===
Giancarlo Antognoni, former captain of Fiorentina
While the 1960s did result in some trophies and good Serie A finishes for Fiorentina, nobody believed that the club could challenge for the title. The 1968–69 season started with Milan as frontrunners, but on match day 7 they lost to Bologna and were overtaken by Gigi Riva's Cagliari Calcio. Fiorentina, after an unimpressive start, then moved to the top of the Serie A, but the first half of their season finished with a 2–2 draw against Varese, leaving Cagliari as outright league leader. The second half of the season was a three-way battle between the three contending teams, Milan, Cagliari and Fiorentina. Milan fell away, instead focusing their efforts on the European Cup, and it seemed that Cagliari would retain top spot, but after losing against Juventus, Fiorentina took over at the top. The team then won all of their remaining matches, beating rivals Juventus in Turin on the penultimate matchday to seal their second, and last, national title. In the European Cup competition the following year Fiorentina had some good results, including a win in the USSR against Dynamo Kyiv, but they were eventually knocked out in the quarter finals after a 3–0 defeat in Glasgow to Celtic.

Viola players began the 1970s decade with Scudetto sewed on their breast, but the period was not especially fruitful for the team. After a 5th place finish in 1971, they finished in mid-table almost every year, even flirting with relegation in 1972 and 1978. The Viola did win the Anglo-Italian League Cup in 1974 and won the Coppa Italia again in 1975. The team consisted of young talents like Vincenzo Guerini and Moreno Roggi, who had the misfortune to suffer bad injuries, and above all Giancarlo Antognoni, who would later become an idol to Fiorentina's fans. The young average age of the players led to the team being called Fiorentina Ye-Ye.

===Pontello era===
The new team logo of the period
In 1980 Fiorentina was bought by Flavio Pontello, from a rich house-builder family. He quickly changed the team's anthem and logo, leading to some complaints by the fans, but he started to bring in high-quality players such as Francesco Graziani and Eraldo Pecci from Torino, Daniel Bertoni from Sevilla, Daniele Massaro from Monza and a young Pietro Vierchowod from Sampdoria. The team was built around Giancarlo Antognoni, and in Serie A 1981-82 Fiorentina were involved in an exciting duel with rival Juventus. After a bad injury to Antognoni, the league title was decided on the final day of the season, when Fiorentina were denied a goal against Cagliari and were unable to win. Juventus won the title with a disputed penalty, and the rivalry between the two teams erupted.

The following years were strange for Fiorentina, who vacillated between high finishes and relegation battles. Fiorentina also bought two interesting players, El Puntero Ramón Díaz and, most significantly, the young Roberto Baggio.

In 1990 Fiorentina fought to avoid relegation right up until the final day of the season, but did reach the UEFA Cup final, where they again faced Juventus. The Turin team won the trophy, but Fiorentina's tifosi once again had real cause for complaint: the second leg of the final was played in Avellino (Fiorentina's home ground was suspended), a city with a lot of Juventus' fans, and Roberto Baggio was sold to the rival team on the day of the final. Pontello, suffering from economic difficulties, was selling all the players and was forced to leave the club after serious riots in Florence's streets. The club was then acquired by the famous filmmaker Mario Cecchi Gori.

===Cecchi Gori era: from Champions League to bankruptcy===
Rui Costa, one of the most prominent Fiorentina players of the 1990s
The first season under Cecchi Gori's ownership was one of stabilization, after which the new chairman started to sign some good players like Brian Laudrup, Stefan Effenberg, Francesco Baiano and, most importantly, Gabriel Batistuta, who became an iconic player for the team during the 1990s. In 1993, however, Mario Cecchi Gori died and was succeeded as chairman by his son Vittorio Cecchi Gori. Despite a good start to the season, Vittorio Cecchi Gori fired the coach, Luigi Radice, after a defeat against Atalanta, From Corriere della Sera of 5 January 1993 and replaced him with Aldo Agroppi. The results were dreadful: Fiorentina fell into the bottom half of the standings and were relegated on the last day of the season.

Claudio Ranieri was brought in as coach for the 1993–94 season, and that year Fiorentina dominated Serie B (second division). Upon their return to Serie A, Ranieri put together a good team centred around new top scorer Batistuta, signing the young talent Rui Costa from Benfica and the new world champion Brazilian defender Márcio Santos. The former became an idol to Fiorentina fans, while the second disappointed and was sold after only a season. Viola finished the season in 10th.

The following season Cecchi Gori bought other important players like Stefan Schwarz. The club again proved its mettle in cup competitions, winning the Coppa Italia against Atalanta, and finished joint 3rd in Serie A. In the summer, Fiorentina was the first non-national champion to win the Supercoppa Italiana, defeating AC Milan 2–1 at the San Siro.

Fiorentina's 95–96 season was disappointing in the league, but they did reach the Cup Winners' Cup semi-final by beating Gloria Bistrita, Sparta Prague, and Benfica. The team lost the semi-final to the eventual winner of the competition, FC Barcelona (Away 1–1, Home 0–2). The season's main signings were Luís Oliveira and Andrei Kanchelskis, the latter of whom suffered a lot of injuries.

At the end of the season, Ranieri left Fiorentina for Valencia CF, and Cecchi Gori appointed Alberto Malesani. Fiorentina played well but struggled against smaller teams, although they did manage to qualify for the UEFA Cup. Malesani left Fiorentina after only a season and was succeeded by Giovanni Trapattoni. With Trapattoni's expert guidance and Batistuta's goals, Fiorentina challenged for the title in 1998–99 but finished the season in third, earning them qualification for the UEFA Champions League. The following year was disappointing in Serie A, but Viola played some historical matches in Champions League, beating Arsenal 1–0 at the old Wembley Stadium and Manchester United 2–0 in Florence. They were ultimately eliminated in the second group stage.

At the end of the season Trapattoni left the club and was replaced by Turkish coach Fatih Terim. More significantly, however, Batistuta was sold to Roma, who eventually won the title the following year. Fiorentina played well in 2000–01 and stayed in the top half of Serie A, despite the resignation of Terim and the arrival of Roberto Mancini. They also won the Coppa Italia for the sixth and last time.

2001 heralded major changes for Fiorentina, as the terrible state of the club's finances was revealed: they were unable to pay wages and had debts of around USD 50 million. The club's owner, Vittorio Cecchi Gori, was able to raise some more money, but even this soon proved to be insufficient resources to sustain the club. Fiorentina were relegated at the end of the 2001–02 season and went into judicially controlled administration in June 2002. This form of bankruptcy (sports companies cannot exactly fail in this way in Italy, but they can suffer a similar procedure) meant that the club was refused a place in Serie B for the 2002–03 season, and as a result effectively ceased to exist.

===Della Valle era===
The club was promptly re-established in August 2002 as Associazione Calcio Fiorentina e Florentia Viola with shoe and leather entrepreneur Diego Della Valle as new owner, and was admitted into Serie C2, the fourth tier of Italian football. The only player to remain at the club in its new incarnation was Angelo Di Livio, whose commitment to club's cause further endeared him to the fans. Helped by Di Livio and 30-goal striker Christian Riganò, the club won its Serie C2 group with considerable ease, which would normally have led to a promotion to Serie C1. However, due to the bizarre Caso Catania (Catania Case) the club skipped Serie C1 and was admitted into Serie B, something that was only made possible by the Italian Football Federation's decision to resolve the Catania situation by increasing the number of teams in Serie B from 20 to 24 and promoting Fiorentina for "sports merits". In the 2003 off-season, the club also bought back the right to use the Fiorentina name and the famous shirt design, and re-incorporated itself as ACF Fiorentina.

Cesare Prandelli, the club's longest-serving manager (2005–2010)
The club's unusual double promotion was controversial, with some suggesting that Fiorentina did not deserve it. However, the club remained in Serie B and managed to finish the 2003–04 season in sixth place. This put the Viola in a two-legged playoff against Perugia (the 15th-place finisher in Serie A) for a top-flight place during the next season. Fiorentina completed their remarkable comeback by winning the match 2–1 on aggregate, with both goals scored by Enrico Fantini, to gain promotion back to Serie A. In their first season back in Italian football's top flight the club struggled to avoid relegation, only securing survival on the last day of the season and only avoiding a relegation playoff based on their head-to-head record against Bologna and Parma. In 2005, Della Valle decided to appoint Pantaleo Corvino as new sports director.

Alberto Gilardino serves as the prima punta of the Tuscany-based outfit for the last few years.
In 2005–06, Fiorentina hired Cesare Prandelli as their new head coach and made several signings during the summer transfer market, most notably Palermo's 20-goal striker Luca Toni and French goalkeeper Sébastien Frey. The combination of captain Dario Dainelli and Czech international regular Tomáš Ujfaluši in defence, Cristian Brocchi as midfield ball winner, Martin Jorgensen on the wing, Stefano Fiore as playmaker and key marksman Toni, with Frey in goal, proved to be an outstanding force in Serie A, giving them a fourth place finish with 74 points and qualifying the team for the third qualifying round of the Champions League. Toni scored 31 goals in 38 appearances, the first player to pass the 30-goal mark since Antonio Valentin Angelillo in the 1958–59 season, for which he was awarded the European Golden Boot.

On 14 July 2006, however, Fiorentina were relegated to Serie B due to their involvement in the 2006 Serie A match fixing scandal and given a 12-point penalty. The team was reinstated to the Serie A on appeal, but with a 19-point penalty for the 2006–07 season. The team's UEFA Champions League place was also rescinded. After the start of the season Fiorentina's penalization was reduced from 19 points to 15 on appeal to the Italian courts.

Despite starting the 2006–07 season with a 15-point penalty, Fiorentina nevertheless managed to secure a place in the 2007–08 edition of the UEFA Cup. The combination of Toni and Adrian Mutu proved to be one of Serie A's most proficient strike partnerships, scoring 31 goals between them.

While many doubted the potential of the Viola in the 2007–08 season due to Toni's departure, Fiorentina had a sensational start to the season and were tipped by Marcello Lippi and other prominent names in football as a surprise challenger for the Scudetto. However, this form tailed off towards the middle of the season, with several disappointing losses in connection with a grievous family loss suffered by club manager Prandelli. The club reached the semi-final of the UEFA Cup, where they were ultimately defeated by Rangers on penalties after two 0–0 ties. The season ended on a high note as Fiorentina defeated Torino 1–0 on the final day of the season to secure a UEFA Champions League spot at the expense of AC Milan. That campaign ended in the group stages, however, with the club finishing third and securing a path to the UEFA Cup instead.

The 2008–09 season continued this success, a fourth place finish assuring Fiorentina's spot in 2010's Champions League playoffs. The Viola also took part to the 2008–09 UEFA Champions League, reaching the group phase after defeating Slavia Prague in the third qualifying round, but the club did not manage to qualify to the knockout rounds and was successively eliminated from the 2008–09 UEFA Cup too. In contrast to their Champions League campaign, La Viola remained in the top tier of the domestic league.

Stevan Jovetić, the Viola's emerging young talent
A reversal of trends took place in the ongoing 2009–10 season, as the club saw a dip in their Serie A form, yet proved itself to be a surprise dark horse in Europe. Fiorentina started their domestic campaign strongly, trailing leaders Inter along with Juventus and Sampdoria earlier in the season, but steadily lost momentum and slipped to mid-table positions at the latter half of the season. In Europe, the team got past Sporting in the qualifying rounds and drawn a tight group consisting of Lyon, Liverpool and Debrecen. Losing their first away fixture against Lyon, many dismissed their chances of getting through, but the Italians staged a comeback with winning all their remaining matches, which included defeating Liverpool home and away. The Viola qualified as group champions, but eventually succumbed to Bayern Munich due to away goals, in a controversial double encounter involving what was considered as poor refereeing. Tom Henning Øvrebø, who led the first leg in Germany, was then lambasted by journalists and Italian footballing figures for his decisions, most notably allowing a Miroslav Klose offside goal (that eventually fired Bayern through the next round), calling into attention the possible implementation of video replays in football. Fiorentina also maintained a strong Coppa Italia campaign, reaching the semifinal before being defeated by the eventual winner Inter. The domestic season ended on a sour note as the Viola failed to reach a European position. During this period, on 24 September 2009, Andrea Della Valle resigned from his position as chairman of ACF Fiorentina, and announced all duties would be temporarily transferred to Mario Cognini, Fiorentina's vice president until a permanent position could be filled. On 26 October 2009, Andrea Della Valle stepped down as chairman. The position is now vacant.

In June 2010 the Viola bid farewell to long-time manager Prandelli (by then the longest-serving coach in the team's history), who was departing to coach the national team, with Catania's young Siniša Mihajlović replacing him.

==Players==
: For transfers, see 2011–12 ACF Fiorentina season

===Current squad===
 

===Out on loan===

===Other under contract players===

===Notable players===

==Managerial history==
Fiorentina have had many managers and head coaches throughout their history. Below is a chronological list from the club's foundation in 1926 to the present day. cite news|url=http://www.geocities.com/violaequipe/altri/allena.htm|publisher=Viola Equipe|title=Gli allenatori della Fiorentina|date=24 June 2007|author=Maurizio Rontani 

 Name Nationality Years Károly Csapkay 1926–28 Károly CsapkayGyula Feldmann 1928–30 Gyula Feldmann 1930–31 Hermann Felsner 1931–33 William Rady 1933 Ferenc Ging 1933–34 Guido Ara 1934–37 Ottavio Baccani 1937–38 Ferenc Molnar 1938 Rudolf Soutschek 1938–39 Giuseppe Galluzzi 1939–45 Guido Ara 1946 Renzo Magli 1946–47 Imre Senkey 1947 Luigi Ferrero 1947–51 Renzo Magli 1951–53 Fulvio Bernardini 1953–58 Lajos Czeizler 1958–59 Luigi Ferrero 1959 Luis Carniglia 1959–60 Giuseppe Chiappella 1960 Nándor Hidegkuti 1960–62 Ferruccio Valcareggi 1962–64 Giuseppe Chiappella 1964–67 Luigi Ferrero 1967–68 Andrea Bassi 1968 Bruno Pesaola 1968–71 Oronzo Pugliese 1971 Nils Liedholm 1971–73 Luigi Radice 1973–74 Nereo Rocco 1974–75 Name Nationality Years Carlo Mazzone 1975–77 Mario Mazzoni 1977–78 Giuseppe Chiappella 1978 Paolo Carosi 1978–81 Giancarlo De Sisti 1981–85 Ferruccio Valcareggi 1985 Aldo Agroppi 1985–86 Eugenio Bersellini 1986–87 Sven-Göran Eriksson 1987–89 Bruno Giorgi 1989–90 Francesco Graziani 1990 Sebastião Lazaroni 1990–91 Luigi Radice 1991–93 Aldo Agroppi 1993 Luciano Chiarugi 1993 Claudio Ranieri 1993–97 Alberto Malesani 1997–98 Giovanni Trapattoni 1998–00 Fatih Terim 2000–01 Luciano Chiarugi 2001 Roberto Mancini 2001 Ottavio Bianchi 2001–02 Luciano Chiarugi 2002 Eugenio Fascetti 2002 Pietro Vierchowod 2002 Alberto Cavasin 2002–03 Emiliano Mondonico 2003–04 Sergio Buso 2004–05 Dino Zoff 2005 Cesare Prandelli 2005–10 Siniša Mihajlović 2010–11 Delio Rossi 2011– 

==Club strip==
===Badge===
The badge used by Florentia Viola
The official emblem of the city of Florence, a red fleur-de-lis on a white field, has been pivotal in the all-round symbolism of the club.

Over the course of the club's history they have had several badge changes, all of which incorporated Florence's fleur-de-lis in some way. The first one was nothing more than the city's coat of arms, a white shield with the red fleur-de-lis inside. It was soon changed to a very stylized fleur-de-lis, always red, and sometimes even without the white field. The most common symbol, adopted for about twenty years, had been a white lozenge with the flower inside. During the season they were Italian champions, the lozenge disappeared and the flower was overlapped with the scudetto.

The logo introduced by owner Flavio Pontello in 1980 was particularly distinct, consisting of one half of the city of Florence's emblem and one half of the letter "F", for Fiorentina. People disliked it when it was introduced, believing it was a commercial decision and, above all, because the symbol bore more of a resemblance to a halberd than a fleur-de-lis. 

Today's logo is a kite shaped double lozenge bordered in gold. The outer lozenge has a purple background with the letters "AC" in white and the letter "F" in red, standing for the club's name. The inner lozenge is white with a gold border and the red fleur-de-lis of Florence. This logo had been in use from 1992 to 2002, but after the financial crisis and resurrection of the club the new one couldn't use the same logo. Florence's comune instead granted Florentia Viola use of the stylized coat of arms used in other city documents. Diego Della Valle acquired the current logo the following year in a judicial auction for a fee of €2.5 million, making it the most expensive logo in Italian football.

===Kit and colours===
When Fiorentina was founded in 1926, the players wore red and white halved shirts derived from the colour of the city emblem. The more well-known and highly distinctive purple kit was adopted in 1928 and has been used ever since, giving rise to the nickname La Viola ("The Purple (team)"). Tradition has it that Fiorentina got their purple kit by mistake after an accident washing the old red and white coloured kits in the river. 

The away kit has always been predominantly white, sometimes with purple and red elements, sometimes all-white. The shorts had been purple when the home kit was with white shorts. Fiorentina's third kit was first one in the 1995–96 season and it was all-red with purple borders and two lilies on the shoulders. The red shirt has been the most worn 3rd shirt by Fiorentina, although they also wore rare yellow shirts ('97–'98, '99–'00 and '10–'11) and a sterling version, mostly in the Coppa Italia, in 2000–01.

====Kit evolution====

 

==World Cup winners==
* Mario Pizziolo (Italy 1934)
* Giancarlo Antognoni (Spain 1982)
* Francesco Graziani (Spain 1982)
* Giovanni Galli (Spain 1982)
* Pietro Vierchowod (Spain 1982)
* Daniele Massaro (Spain 1982)
* Daniel Passarella (Mexico 1986)
* Luca Toni (Germany 2006)
* Alberto Gilardino (Germany 2006)

==Honours==
===National titles===
Serie A:
:*Winners (2) : 1955–56; 1968–69
:*Runners-up (5): 1956–57, 1957–58, 1958–59, 1959–60, 1981–82

Coppa Italia:
:*Winners (6) : 1939–40; 1960–61; 1965–66; 1974–75; 1995–96; 2000–01
:*Runners-up (3): 1958, 1959–60, 1998–99

Supercoppa Italiana:
:*Winners (1) : 1996
:*Runners-up (1): 2001

===Europeans titles===
European Cup/ UEFA Champions League:
:*Runners-up (1): 1956–57

UEFA Cup Winners' Cup:
:*Winners (1) : 1960–61 
:*Runners-up (1): 1961–62

UEFA Cup/ UEFA Europa League:
:*Runners-up (1): 1989–90

===Minor titles===
Mitropa Cup
:*Winners (1) : 1966

Anglo-Italian League Cup
:*Winners (1) : 1975

Serie B
:*Winners: 1930–31; 1938–39; 1993–94

Serie C2 (as Florentia Viola)
:*Winners: 2002–03

==References==

==External links==
* Official website 
* Fans forum 

 



[[Afrobeat]]

Afrobeat is a combination of traditional Yoruba music, jazz, highlife, funk and chanted vocals, fused with percussion and vocal styles, popularised in Africa in the 1970s. Its main creator was the Nigerian multi-instrumentalist and bandleader Fela Kuti, who gave it its name, who used it to revolutionise musical structure as well as the political context in his native Nigeria. It was Kuti who coined the term "afrobeat" upon his return from a U.S. tour with his group Nigeria '70 (formerly Koola Lobitos). Afrobeat features chants, call-and-response vocals, and complex, interacting rhythms. 

The new sound hailed from a club that he established called the Afro-Shrine. Upon arriving in Nigeria, Kuti also changed the name of his group to Africa '70. The band maintained a five-year residency in the Afro-Shrine from 1970 to 1975 while afrobeat thrived among Nigerian youth. Afrobeat is now one of the most recognizable music genres in the world and has influenced as many Western musicians as it has African ones with its exuberant style and polyrhythms.

==Origins==
Afrobeat originated from the southern part of Nigeria in the 1960s where Kuti experimented with many different forms of contemporary music of the time. Prevalent in his and Lagbaja's music are native African harmonies and rhythms, taking different elements and combining, modernizing and improvising upon them. Politics are essential to afrobeat, since founder Kuti used social criticism to pave the way for social change. His message can be described as confrontational and controversial, which can be related to the political climate of most of the African countries in the 1960s, many of which were dealing with political injustice and military corruption while recovering from the transition from colonial governments to self-determination. As the genre spread throughout the African continent many bands took up the style. The recordings of these bands and their songs were rarely heard or exported outside the originating countries but many can now be found on compilation albums and CDs from specialist record shops.

==Instrumentation==
Big band (15 to 30 pieces: Fela-era afrobeat) and energetic performances

*Lead vocals (may play sax/key solos as well)
*Chorus vocals (may include horn players)
*Rhythm guitar(s) (plays funk strumming pattern)
*Tenor guitar (plays a finger-picked ostinato groove)
*Bass guitar
*Drum set, generally in the form polyrhythmic percussion
*Saxophone(s)
*Trumpet(s)
*Trombone(s)
*Organ/keyboards
*Rhythm conga #1
*Rhythm conga #2
*Solo (lead) conga
*Akuba: a set of 3 small stick-hit congas (play flourishes/solos, and ostinatos). Also mistakenly called "gbedu" (gbedu is the name of a large ceremonial drum).
*"Sticks"/claves (plays ostinato)
*Shekere

==Influence==
Many jazz musicians have been attracted to afrobeat. From Roy Ayers in the 1970s to Randy Weston in the 1990s, there have been collaborations which have resulted in albums such as Africa: Centre of the World by Roy Ayers, released on the Polydore label in 1981. In 1994 Branford Marsalis, the American jazz saxophonist, included samples of Fela's "Beast of No Nation" on his Buckshot LeFonque album. The new generation of DJs and musicians of the 2000s who have fallen in love with both Kuti's material and other rare releases have made compilations and remixes of these recordings, thus re-introducing the genre to new generations of listeners and fans of afropop and groove.

Afrobeat has profoundly influenced important contemporary producers and musicians like Brian Eno and David Byrne, who credit Fela Kuti as an essential muse. Both worked on Talking Heads' highly-acclaimed 1980 album Remain In Light which brought polyrhythmic afrobeat influences to Western music. More recently, the horn section of Antibalas have been guest musicians on TV On The Radio's highly acclaimed 2008 album Dear Science, as well as on British band Foals' 2008 album, Antidotes. Some Afrobeat influence can also be found in the music of Vampire Weekend and Paul Simon.

==Afrobeat musicians==
*Fela Kuti 
*Kola Ogunkoya
*Sonny Okosun 
*Tony Allen 

===Today===
There are several active afrobeat bands worldwide today. Afrobeat today is often mixed with other genres, such as hip hop, makossa, gospel, yahoozee and galala. 

Modern afrobeat bands/artists include:
*Adé Bantu, German-Nigerian musician,
*Lágbájá, Nigerian musician
*Kokolo, New York City Afrobeat group
*Nomo, Ann Arbor based group that weaves various styles into a primarily Afrobeat sound
*Ariya Astrobeat Arkestra, 10 piece cosmic Afrobeat collective based in Leeds, UK
*Afrodizz, an eight-piece band from Montreal, Canada
*Tony Allen, drummer, played in Fela Kuti's band
*Antibalas, Brooklyn, New York based multiracial Afrobeat Orchestra
*Funsho Ogundipe, Nigerian musician
*Chopteeth, an international 14 piece outfit based in Washington D.C.
*Femi Kuti, Nigerian musician, son of Fela Kuti
*Seun Kuti, Nigerian musician, son of Fela Kuti
*Weird MC, Nigerian musician
*May7ven, Nigerian born UK based musician
*Mr. Something Something, Canadian afrobeat group
*Chicago AfroBeat Project

==References==
 

==External links==
*The Afrobeat Blog
* The Unofficial Seun Kuti Fan-Site – Unofficial fan-site for Seun Kuti & Egypt 80 with news, videos, music, pictures and much more]
* The Shrine The Unofficial Website for Fela Kuti, Femi Kuti and Afrobeat Music
* BBC Afrobeat Documentary
*
*Afrobeat Font - a typeface about afrobeat music



[[Arithmetic function]]

In number theory, an arithmetic (or arithmetical) function is a real or complex valued function ƒ(n) defined on the set of natural numbers (i.e. positive integers) that "expresses some arithmetical property of n." Hardy & Wright, intro. to Ch. XVI 

An example of an arithmetic function is the non-principal character (mod 4) defined by

: where is the Kronecker symbol.

To emphasize that they are being thought of as functions rather than sequences, values of an arithmetic function are usually denoted by a(n) rather than a'n.

There is a larger class of number-theoretic functions that do not fit the above definition, e.g. the prime-counting functions. This article provides links to functions of both classes.

==Notation==

 and mean that the sum or product is over all prime numbers:

: 

Similarly, and mean that the sum or product is over all prime powers with strictly positive exponent (so 1 is not counted):

:

 and mean that the sum or product is over all positive divisors of n, including 1 and n. E.g., if n = 12,

:

The notations can be combined: and mean that the sum or product is over all prime divisors of n. E.g., if n = 18,

:

and similarly and mean that the sum or product is over all prime powers dividing n. E.g., if n = 24,

:

== Multiplicative and additive functions ==

An arithmetic function a is

* completely additive if a(mn) = a(m) + a(n) for all natural numbers m and n;

* completely multiplicative if a(mn) = a(m)a(n) for all natural numbers m and n;

Two whole numbers m and n are called coprime if their greatest common divisor is 1; i.e., if there is no prime number that divides both of them.

Then an arithmetic function a is

* additive if a(mn) = a(m) + a(n) for all coprime natural numbers m and n;

* multiplicative if a(mn) = a(m)a(n) for all coprime natural numbers m and n.

==Ω(n), ω(n), νp(n) – prime power decomposition ==

The fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that any positive integer n can be represented uniquely as a product of powers of primes: where p1 < p2 < ... < p'k are primes and the aj are positive integers. (1 is given by the empty product.)

It is often convenient to write this as an infinite product over all the primes, where all but a finite number have a zero exponent. Define νp(n) as the exponent of the highest power of the prime p that divides n. I.e. if p is one of the p'i then νp(n) = a'i, otherwise it is zero. Then

:

In terms of the above the functions ω and Ω are defined by

:ω(n) = k,
:Ω(n) = a1 + a2 + ... + ak.

To avoid repetition, whenever possible formulas for the functions listed in this article are given in terms of n and the corresponding p'i, a'i, ω, and Ω.

==Multiplicative functions==
===σk(n), τ(n), d(n) – divisor sums===

σk(n) is the sum of the kth powers of the positive divisors of n, including 1 and n, where k is a complex number.

σ1(n), the sum of the (positive) divisors of n, is usually denoted by σ(n).

Since a positive number to the zero power is one, σ0(n) is therefore the number of (positive) divisors of n; it is usually denoted by d(n) or τ(n) (for the German Teiler = divisors).

:

Setting k = 0 in the second product gives

:

===φ(n) – Euler totient function===

φ(n), the Euler totient function, is the number of positive integers not greater than n that are coprime to n.

:

===Jk(n) – Jordan totient function===

Jk(n), the Jordan totient function, is the number of k-tuples of positive integers all less than or equal to n that form a coprime (k + 1)-tuple together with n. It is a generalization of Euler's totient, φ{n} = J1{n}.
:

===μ(n) - Möbius function===

μ(n), the Möbius function, is important because of the Möbius inversion formula. See Dirichlet convolution, below.

:

This implies that μ(1) = 1. (Because Ω(1) = ω(1) = 0.)

===τ(n) – Ramanujan tau function===

τ(n), the Ramanujan tau function, is defined by its generating function identity:

:

Although it is hard to say exactly what "arithmetical property of n" it "expresses", Hardy, Ramanujan, § 10.2 (τ(n) is (2π)−12 times the nth Fourier coefficient in the q-expansion of the modular discriminant function) Apostol, Modular Functions ..., § 1.15, Ch. 4, and ch. 6 it is included among the arithmetical functions because it is multiplicative and it occurs in identities involving certain σk(n) and r'k(n) functions (because these are also coefficients in the expansion of modular forms).

===c'q(n) – Ramanujan's sum ===

c'q(n), Ramanujan's sum, is the sum of the nth powers of the primitive qth roots of unity:

:

Even though it is defined as a sum of complex numbers (irrational for most values of q), it is an integer. For a fixed value of n it is multiplicative in q:

:If q and r are coprime, 

Many of the functions mentioned in this article have expansions as series involving these sums; see the article Ramanujan's sum for examples.

==Completely multiplicative functions==
===λ(n) – Liouville function===

λ(n), the Liouville function, is defined by

:

===χ(n) – characters===

All Dirichlet characters χ(n) are completely multiplicative. An example is the non-principal character (mod 4) defined in the introduction. Two characters have special notations:

The principal character (mod n) is denoted by χ0(a) (or χ1(a)). It is defined as

:

The quadratic character (mod n) is denoted by the Jacobi symbol for odd n (it is not defined for even n.):

:

In this formula is the Legendre symbol, defined for all integers a and all odd primes p by

:

Following the normal convention for the empty product, 

==Additive functions==
===ω(n) – distinct prime divisors ===

ω(n), defined above as the number of distinct primes dividing n, is additive

==Completely additive functions==
===Ω(n) – prime divisors===

Ω(n), defined above as the number of prime factors of n counted with multiplicities, is completely additive.

===νp(n) – prime power dividing n===

For a fixed prime p, νp(n), defined above as the exponent of the largest power of p dividing n, is completely additive.

==Neither multiplicative nor additive==
===π(x), Π(x), θ(x), ψ(x) – prime count functions===
Unlike the other functions listed in this article, these are defined for non-negative real (not just integer) arguments. They are used in the statement and proof of the prime number theorem.

π(x), the prime counting function, is the number of primes not exceeding x.

:

A related function counts prime powers with weight 1 for primes, 1/2 for their squares, 1/3 for cubes, ...

:

θ(x) and ψ(x), the Chebyshev functions
are defined as sums of the natural logarithms of the primes not exceeding x:

:

:

===Λ(n) – von Mangoldt function===

Λ(n), the von Mangoldt function, is 0 unless the argument is a prime power, in which case it is the natural log of the prime:

:

===p(n) – partition function===
p(n), the partition function, is the number of ways of representing n as a sum of positive integers, where two representations with the same summands in a different order are not counted as being different:

:

===λ(n) – Carmichael function===

λ(n), the Carmichael function, is the smallest positive number such that for all a coprime to n. Equivalently, it is the least common multiple of the orders of the elements of the multiplicative group of integers modulo n.

For powers of odd primes and for 2 and 4, λ(n) is equal to the Euler totient function of n; for powers of 2 greater than 4 it is equal to one half of the Euler totient function of n:

:

and for general n it is the least common multiple of λ of each of the prime power factors of n:

:

===h(n) – Class number===

h(n), the class number function, is the order of the ideal class group of an algebraic extension of the rationals with discriminant n. The notation is ambiguous, as there are in general many extensions with the same discriminant. See quadratic field and cyclotomic field for classical examples.

===r'k(n) – Sum of k squares===

r'k(n) is the number of ways n can be represented as the sum of k squares, where representations that differ only in the order of the summands or in the signs of the square roots are counted as different.

:

== Summation functions ==

Given an arithmetic function a(n), its summation function A(x) is defined by
:
A can be regarded as a function of a real variable. Given a positive integer m, A is constant along open intervals m < x < m + 1, and has a jump discontinuity at each integer for which a(m) ≠ 0.

Since such functions are often represented by series and integrals, to achieve pointwise convergence it is usual to define the value at the discontinuities as the average of the values to the left and right:

:

Individual values of arithmetic functions may fluctuate wildly – as in most of the above examples. Summation functions "smooth out" these fluctuations. In some cases it may be possible to find asymptotic behaviour for the summation function for large x.

A classical example of this phenomenon Hardy & Wright, §§ 18.1–18.2 is given by d(n), the number of divisors of n:

:

:

:

==Dirichlet convolution ==

Given an arithmetic function a(n), let Fa(s), for complex s, be the function defined by the corresponding Dirichlet series (where it converges): Hardy & Wright, § 17.6, show how the theory of generating functions can be constructed in a purely formal manner with no attention paid to convergence. 
:
Fa(s) is called a generating function of a(n). The simplest such series, corresponding to the constant function a(n) = 1 for all n, is ς(s) the Riemann zeta function.

The generating function of the Möbius function is the inverse of the zeta function:

:

Consider two arithmetic functions a and b and their respective generating functions F'a(s) and F'b(s). The product F'a(s)F'b(s) can be computed as follows:
:

It is a straightforward exercise to show that if c(n) is defined by

:

then

:

This function c is called the Dirichlet convolution of a and b, and is denoted by .

A particularly important case is convolution with the constant function a(n) = 1 for all n, corresponding to multiplying the generating function by the zeta function:

:

Multiplying by the inverse of the zeta function gives the Möbius inversion formula:

:

If f is multiplicative, then so is g. If f is completely multiplicative, then g is multiplicative, but may or may not be completely multiplicative. The article multiplicative function has a short proof.

==Relations among the functions==

There are a great many formulas connecting arithmetical functions with each other and with the functions of analysis, especially powers, roots, and the exponential and log functions.

Here are a few examples:

===Dirichlet convolutions===

: where λ is the Liouville function. Hardy & Wright, Thm. 263 

: Hardy & Wright, Thm. 63 

:: Möbius inversion

: see references at Jordan's totient function 

:: Möbius inversion

: Holden et al in external links The formula is Gegenbauer's 

: Hardy & Wright, Thm. 288–290 Dineva in external links, prop. 4 

: Hardy & Wright, Thm. 264 

:: Möbius inversion

: 

:: Möbius inversion

: 

:: Möbius inversion

: 

: where λ is the Liouville function.

: Hardy & Wright, Thm. 296 

:: Möbius inversion

===Sums of squares===

: (Lagrange's four-square theorem).

: where χ is the non-principal character (mod 4) defined in the introduction. Hardy & Wright, Thm. 278 

There is a formula for r3 in the section on class numbers below.

: where ν = ν2(n). Hardy & Wright, Thm. 386 Hardy, Ramanujan, eqs 9.1.2, 9.1.3 Koblitz, Ex. III.5.2 

: Hardy & Wright, § 20.13 

Define the function σk*(n) as Hardy, Ramanujan, § 9.7 

:

That is, if n is odd, σk*(n) is the sum of the kth powers of the divisors of n, i.e. σk(n), and if n is even it is the sum of the kth powers of the even divisors of n minus the sum of the kth powers of the odd divisors of n.

: Hardy, Ramanujan, § 9.13 

Adopt the convention that Ramanujan's τ(x) = 0 if x is not an integer.

: Hardy, Ramanujan, § 9.17 

===Divisor sum convolutions===

Here "convolution" does not mean "Dirichlet convolution" but instead refers to the formula for the coefficients of the product of two power series:

:

The sequence is called the convolution or the Cauchy product of the seqences a'n and b'n. 
See Eisenstein series for a discussion of the series and functional identities involved in these formulas. The paper by Huard, Ou, Spearman, and Williams in hte external links also has proofs. 

: Ramanujan, On Certain Arithmetical Functions, Table IV; Papers, p. 146 

: Koblitz, ex. III.2.8 

: Koblitz, ex. III.2.3 

: Koblitz, ex. III.2.2 

: where τ(n) is Ramanujan's function. Koblitz, ex. III.2.4 Apostol, Modular Functions ..., Ex. 6.10 

Since σk(n) (for natural number k) and τ(n) are integers, the above formulas can be used to prove congruences Apostol, Modular Functions..., Ch. 6 Ex. 10 for the functions. See Tau-function for some examples.

Extend the domain of the partition function by setting p(0) = 1.

: G.H. Hardy, S. Ramannujan, Asymptotic Formulæ in Combinatory Analysis, § 1.3; in Ramannujan, Papers p. 279 This recurrence can be used to compute p(n).

===Class number related===

Dirichlet discovered formulas that relate the class number h of quadratic number fields to the Jacobi symbol. Landau, p. 168, credits Gauss as well as Dirichlet 

An integer D is called a fundamental discriminant it it is the discriminant of a quadratic number field. This is equivalent to D ≠ 1 and either a) D is squarefree and D &equiv; 1 (mod 4) or b) D &equiv; 0 (mod 4), D/4 is squarefree, and D/4 &equiv; 2 or 3 (mod 4). Cohen, Def. 5.1.2 

Extend the Jacobi symbol to accept even numbers in the "denominator" by defining the Kronecker symbol:

:

Then if D < −4 is a fundamental discriminant Cohen, Corr. 5.3.13 see Edwards, § 9.5 exercises for more complicated formulas. 

:

There is also a formula relating r3 and h. Again, let D be a fundamental discriminant, D 5040, 
 
: (where γ is the Euler–Mascheroni constant). This is Robin's theorem.

:

: Hardy & Wright, eq. 22.1.2 

: See prime counting functions. 

: Hardy & Wright, eq. 22.1.1 

: Hardy & Wright, eq. 22.1.3 

===Menon's identity===

In 1965 P. Kesava Menon proved László Tóth, external links 
:

In 2009 B. Sury László Tóth, external links generalized this to
:

In fact, if f is any arithmetical function
:
where * stands for Dirichlet convolution. Menon proved this for multiplicative f in 1965 and V. Sita Ramaiah for general f in 1978. László Tóth, external links 

In the referenced paper László Tóth proves a number of related identities, including
:
where m1 and m2 are odd, m = lcm(m1, m2).

===Miscellaneous===

Let m and n be distinct, odd, and positive. Then the Jacobi symbol satisfies the Law of Quadratic Reciprocity:

: 

: and where λ(n) is Liouville's function.

: Hardy Ramanujan, eq. 3.10.3 Hardy & Wright, § 22.13 

: where λ(n) is Carmichael's function. Further,

: See Multiplicative group of integers modulo n and Primitive root modulo n. 

: Hardy & Wright, Thm. 329 

: Hardy & Wright, Thms. 271, 272 Note that Hardy & Wright, eq. 16.3.1 

:

:

: Ramanujan, Some Formulæ in the Analytic Theory of Numbers, eq. (C); Papers p.133. A footnote says that Hardy told Ramanujan it also appears in an 1857 paper by Liouville. Compare this with 13 + 23 + 33 + ... + n3 = (1 + 2 + 3 + ... + n)2

: Ramanujan, Some Formulæ in the Analytic Theory of Numbers, eq. (F); Papers p.134 

: Apostol, Modular Functions ..., ch. 6 eq. 4 

: where τ(n) is Ramanujan's function. Apostol, Modular Functions ..., ch. 6 eq. 3 

==Notes==

== References ==

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

==External links==

* Matthew Holden, Michael Orrison, Michael Varble Yet another Generalization of Euler's Totient Function

* Huard, Ou, Spearman, and Williams. Elementary Evaluation of Certain Convolution Sums Involving Divisor Functions Elementary (i.e. not relying on the theory of modular forms) proofs of divisor sum convolutions, formulas for the number of ways of representing a number as a sum of triangular numbers, and related results.

*Dineva, Rosica, The Euler Totient, the Möbius, and the Divisor Functions

* László Tóth, Menon's Identity and arithmetical sums representing functions of several variables

*



[[ANSI C]]

ANSI C refers to the family of successive standards published by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) for the C programming language. Software developers writing in C are encouraged to conform to the standards, as doing so aids portability between compilers.

==History and outlook==
The first standard for C was published by ANSI. Although this document was subsequently adopted by International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and subsequent revisions published by ISO have been adopted by ANSI, the name ANSI C (rather than ISO C) is still more widely used. While some software developers use the term ISO C, others are standards body–neutral and use Standard C.

===C89===
In 1983, the American National Standards Institute formed a committee, X3J11, to establish a standard specification of C. After a long and arduous process, the standard was completed in 1989 and ratified as ANSI X3.159-1989 "Programming Language C." This version of the language is often referred to as "ANSI C", or sometimes "C89" (to distinguish it from C99).

===C90===
In 1990, the ANSI C standard (with a few minor modifications) was adopted by the International Organization for Standardization as ISO/IEC 9899:1990. This version is sometimes called C90. Therefore, the terms "C89" and "C90" refer to essentially the same language.

===C99===

In March 2000, ANSI adopted the ISO/IEC 9899:1999 standard. This standard is commonly referred to as C99, and it is the most recent standard for the C programming language.

===C1X===

"C1X" is the unofficial name of the planned new standard for the C programming language. It is intended to supersede the existing C standard, informally known as C99.

==Support from major compilers==

ANSI C is now supported by almost all the widely used compilers. Most of the C code being written nowadays is based on ANSI C. Any program written only in standard C and without any hardware dependent assumptions is virtually guaranteed to compile correctly on any platform with a conforming C implementation. Without such precautions, most programs may compile only on a certain platform or with a particular compiler, due, for example, to the use of non-standard libraries, such as GUI libraries, or to the reliance on compiler- or platform-specific attributes such as the exact size of certain data types and byte endianness.

===Compliance detectability===
To mitigate the differences between K&R C and the ANSI C standard, the __STDC__ ("standard c") macro can be used to split code into ANSI and K&R sections.

 #if __STDC__
 extern int getopt(int, char * const *, const char *);
 #else
 extern int getopt();
 #endif

It's better to use "#if __STDC__" as above rather than "#ifdef __STDC__" because some implementation may set __STDC__ to zero to indicate non-ANSI compliance. "#if" will treat any identifiers that couldn't be replaced by a macro as zero (0). Thus even if the macro "__STDC__" is not defined to signify non-ANSI compliance, "#if" will work as shown.

In the above example, a prototype is used in a function declaration for ANSI compliant implementations, while an obsolescent non-prototype declaration is used otherwise. Those are still ANSI-compliant as of C99 and C90, but their use is discouraged.

==Compilers supporting ANSI C==
* GCC
* Microsoft Visual C++ (C90. A few features of C99)
* ARM RealView
* LCC
* OpenWatcom (C89/90 and some C99)

==External links==
* ISO C working group
* Draft ANSI C Standard (ANSI X3J11/88-090) (May 13, 1988), Third Public Review
* Draft ANSI C Rationale (ANSI X3J11/88-151) (Nov 18, 1988)
* C Information Bulletin #1 (ANSI X3J11/93-007) (May 27, 1992)
* 
* 

* 



[[Alien and Sedition Acts]]

Text of the "Alien Friends Act"

The Alien and Sedition Acts were four bills passed in 1798 by the Federalists in the 5th United States Congress in the aftermath of the French Revolution's reign of terror and during an undeclared naval war with France, later known as the Quasi-War. They were signed into law by President John Adams. Opposition to Federalists among Democratic-Republicans reached new heights at this time since the Democratic-Republicans had supported France. Some even seemed to want an event similar to the French Revolution to come to the United States to overthrow the Federalists. Letter to William Smith, November 13, 1787 When Democratic-Republicans in some states refused to enforce federal laws, and even threatened possible rebellion, Federalists threatened to send in an army and force them to capitulate. Knott. "Alexander Hamilton and the Persistence of Myth". p48 As the paranoia sweeping Europe was bleeding over into the United States, calls for secession reached unparalleled heights, and the fledgling nation seemed ready to rip itself apart. Knott. "Alexander Hamilton and the Persistence of Myth". p48 Some of this was seen by Federalists as having been caused by French and French-sympathizing immigrants. The acts were thus meant to guard against this real threat of anarchy. Democratic-Republicans denounced them as being both unconstitutional and designed to stifle criticism of the administration, and as infringing on the right of the states to act in these areas, though they did use them after the 1800 election against Federalists. Chernow, Ron. "Alexander Hamilton". 2004. p668. Penguin Press. They became a major political issue in the elections of 1798 and 1800. They were very controversial in their own day, as they remain to the present day. Opposition to them resulted in the Virginia and Kentucky Resolves, authored by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, which were foundational to the states rights theory that helped lead to the Civil War.

== Acts ==
Four separate laws constituted what is commonly referred to as the "Alien and Sedition Acts"
#The Naturalization Act (officially An act supplementary to, and to amend the act to establish a uniform rule of naturalization; and to repeal the act heretofore passed on that subject; ch. 54, ) repealed and replaced the Naturalization Act of 1795 to extend the duration of residence required for aliens to become citizens of the United States from five years to fourteen years.
#The Alien Act (officially An Act Concerning Aliens; ch. 58, ) authorized the president to deport any resident alien considered "dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States." It was activated June 25, 1798, with a two year expiration date.
#The Alien Enemies Act (officially An Act Respecting Alien Enemies; ch. 66, ) authorized the president to apprehend and deport resident aliens if their home countries were at war with the United States of America. Enacted July 6, 1798, and providing no sunset provision, the act remains intact today as . At the time, war was considered likely between the U.S. and France.
#The Sedition Act (officially An Act in Addition to the Act Entitled "An Act for the Punishment of Certain Crimes against the United States"; ch. 74, ) made it a crime to publish "false, scandalous, and malicious writing" against the government or certain officials. It was enacted July 14, 1798, with an expiration date of March 3, 1801 (the day before Adams' presidential term was to end).

==Prosecutions==

Republican editors, a member of Congress, and private individuals were targets of prosecution under the Sedition Act. Twenty-five people were arrested. Of them, eleven were tried, one died awaiting trial, and ten were convicted of sedition, often in trials before openly partisan Federalist judges.

===Journalists===
Benjamin Franklin Bache, the grandson of Benjamin Franklin, was editor of the Aurora, a Republican newspaper. Bache had accused George Washington of incompetence and financial irregularities, and "the blind, bald, crippled, toothless, querulous ADAMS" of nepotism and monarchical ambition. The Adams administration did not wait for the passage of the Sedition Act but arrested Bache on common law libel charges on June 27, 1798, two weeks before the Act was signed by the President. Bache died of yellow fever in 1798 while awaiting trial. Miller, John C. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (New York: Little Brown and Company 1951) pp. 27-29, 65, 96. 

James Thomson Callender, a Scottish citizen, had been expelled from Great Britain for his political writings. Living first in Philadelphia, then seeking refuge close to Jefferson in Republican Virginia, he wrote a book entitled "The Prospect Before Us" (read and approved by Jefferson before publication) in which he called the Adams administration a "continual tempest of malignant passions" and the President a repulsive pedant, a gross hypocrite and an unprincipled oppressor". Callender, already residing in Virginia and writing for the Richmond Examiner, was indicted under the Sedition Act. Justice Samuel Chase of the Supreme Court presided at Callender's trial. Callender's counsel attempted to argue the unconstitutionality of the Sedition law, but Chase refused to permit the jury to determine the constitutionality of a federal statute. Callender was convicted, and Chase fined him $200 and sentenced him to nine months in jail. Jefferson pardoned Callender when he became President, as he did the others convicted under the Sedition Act, and also gave him fifty dollars towards his fine, the last in a series of payments he made to support the journalist. Callender however, enraged by what he perceived as a slight by the new President, wrote a series of attacks on Jefferson similar to those earlier launched against Adams, and which included the assertion that Jefferson had fathered children by a slave woman. Miller, John C. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (New York: Little Brown and Company 1951) pp. 211-220. 

 Anthony Haswell was an English immigrant and Jeffersonian printer in Vermont. Haswell called for a lottery to raise the money required to pay the fines of Congressman Lyon, while speaking ill of Federalist marshal Jabez Fitch, calling him a "hard-hearted savage". http://www.benningtonmuseum.org/anthony-haswell.html Haswell also often reprinted parts of the Aurora, including Bache's claim that the federal government had employed Tories. Francis Wharton, State Trials of the United States during the Administrations of Washington and Adams. Philadelphia: Carey and Hart, 1849, pp. 684–687. Haswell was found guilty of seditious libel by judge William Paterson, and sentenced to a two month imprisonment and a $200 fine. Geoffrey R. Stone, Perilous Times: Free Speech in Wartime from the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism, W. W. Norton & Company, 2004, pp. 63–64. 

===A member of Congress===
Matthew Lyon, born in Ireland, was a Democratic-Republican congressman from Vermont. He was indicted under the Sedition Act for an essay he had written in the Vermont Journal accusing the administration of "ridiculous pomp, foolish adulation, and selfish avarice". While awaiting trial, Lyon commenced publication of Lyon's Republican Magazine, subtitled "The Scourge of Aristocracy". Supreme Court justice Paterson presiding at trial, denied Lyon's defense of unconstitutionality of the statute, fined Lyon $1,000 and sentenced him to four months in prison. While in prison, Lyon continued to write, and also won re-election. After his release, he returned to Congress. Miller, John C. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (New York: Little Brown and Company 1951) pp. 102-108. 

===Private individuals===
Luther Baldwin, a private citizen, was indicted for a comment he made during a visit by President Adams to Newark, New Jersey. The President was greeted by a crowd and by a committee that saluted him by firing a cannon. A bystander said, "There goes the President and they are firing at his ass." Baldwin replied that he did not care "if they fired through his ass." He was convicted in the federal court for speaking "seditious words tending to defame the President and Government of the United States" and fined $100. Miller, John C. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (New York: Little Brown and Company 1951) pp. 112-114. 

In November 1798, David Brown led a group in Dedham, Massachusetts in setting up a liberty pole with the words, "No Stamp Act, No Sedition Act, No Alien Bills, No Land Tax, downfall to the Tyrants of America; peace and retirement to the President; Long Live the Vice President". Brown was arrested in Andover, Massachusetts, but because he could not afford the $4,000 bail, he was taken to Salem for trial. Brown was tried in June 1799. Brown pled guilty but Justice Samuel Chase asked him to name others who had assisted him. Brown refused, was fined $480, and sentenced to eighteen months in prison, the most severe sentence ever imposed under the Sedition Act. 

===Political nature of the prosecutions===

The Republican prediction that the Sedition Act would be used as a tool to assure the primacy of the Federalists was confirmed by the fact that no Federalist editor was indicted for equally rough language towards Republicans. John C. Miller writes that "the Sedition Act was not construed to mean that the Federalists were to cease maligning and whipping Jefferson", who was, among numerous other assertions, called a "vain author, false prophet, and thorough-bred Frenchman". Miller, John C. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (New York: Little Brown and Company 1951) p. 131-132. It has been said that the Alien Acts were aimed at Albert Gallatin, the Jeffersonian from Geneva; and the Sedition Act aimed at Benjamin Franklin Bache's Aurora. What States Rights Really Mean by Thomas E. Woods, Jr. LewRockwell.com. http://www.historictrials.freeservers.com/seditionacts/info1.htm 

===Consequences of the Alien Act===

While government authorities prepared lists of aliens for deportation, many aliens fled the country during the debate over the Alien and Sedition Acts, and Adams never signed a deportation order. Miller, John C. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (New York: Little Brown and Company 1951) p. 187-193. 

==Constitutionality and Aftermath==

The Democratic-Republicans used the Alien and Sedition Acts as one of their principal issues in the 1800 election, in which Federalists at all levels, were turned out of power. Thomas Jefferson, upon assuming the Presidency, pardoned all of those still serving sentences under the Sedition Act Miller, John C. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (New York: Little Brown and Company 1951) p. 231. though he also used the acts to prosecute some of his own critics before the acts expired. Chernow, Ron. "Alexander Hamilton". 2004. p668. Penguin Press. In 1802, the House Judiciary Committee denounced the Sedition Act as unconstitutional, permitting the refund of fines which had been paid under it. Mott, Frank L., Jefferson and the Press (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press 1943), p. 37. 

The Alien and Sedition Acts were, however, never appealed to the Supreme Court, whose right of judicial review was not established until Marbury v. Madison in 1803. The Court in 1798 was composed entirely of Federalists, all appointed by Washington. Many of them, particularly Associate Justice Samuel Chase, were openly hostile to the Federalists' opponents. Individual Supreme Court Justices, particularly Chase, sitting in circuit, heard many of the cases prosecuting opponents of the Federalists. Subsequent mentions in Supreme Court opinions have assumed that it was unconstitutional. In the seminal free speech case of New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, the Court declared, "Although the Sedition Act was never tested in this Court, the attack upon its validity has carried the day in the court of history." 376 U.S. 254, 276 (1964). In a concurring opinion in Watts v. United States, which involved an alleged threat against President Lyndon Johnson, William O. Douglas noted, "The Alien and Sedition Laws constituted one of our sorriest chapters; and I had thought we had done with them forever ... Suppression of speech as an effective police measure is an old, old device, outlawed by our Constitution." The Alien Enemies Act remained in force and was used as a basis for the internment of Japanese citizens during World War II. 

Vice President Thomas Jefferson denounced the Sedition Act as invalid and a violation of the constitution. 
Jefferson and James Madison also secretly drafted the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions denouncing the federal legislation, though state legislatures rejected these resolutions. Portal:Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions Though the resolutions followed the "interposition" approach of James Madison, Jefferson advocated nullification and at one point drafted a threat for Kentucky to secede. Jefferson's draft said: "where powers are assumed the federal government which have not been delegated, a nullification of the act is the rightful remedy: that every State has a natural right in cases not within the compact, (casus non fœderis) to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits." See Jefferson's draft of the Kentucky Resolutions of 1798. Jefferson's biographer Dumas Malone argued that this might have gotten Jefferson impeached for treason, had his actions become known at the time. Chernow, Ron. "Alexander Hamilton". 2004. p586. Penguin Press. In writing the Kentucky Resolutions, Jefferson warned that, "unless arrested at the threshold," the Alien and Sedition Acts would "necessarily drive these states into revolution and blood." Historian Ron Chernow says of this "he wasn't calling for peaceful protests or civil disobedience: he was calling for outright rebellion, if needed, against the federal government of which he was vice president." Jefferson "thus set forth a radical doctrine of states' rights that effectively undermined the constitution." Chernow, Ron. "Alexander Hamilton". 2004. p587. Penguin Press. 

Chernow argues that neither Jefferson nor Madison sensed that they had sponsored measures as inimical as the Alien and Sedition Acts themselves. Chernow, Ron. "Alexander Hamilton". 2004. p587. Penguin Press. Historian Garry Wills argued "Their nullification effort, if others had picked it up, would have been a greater threat to freedom than the misguided and sedition laws, which were soon rendered feckless by ridicule and electoral pressure" Wills, Gary. "James Madison". p49 The theoretical damage of the Kentucky and Virginia resolutions was "deep and lasting, and was a recipe for disunion". Chernow, Ron. "Alexander Hamilton". 2004. p587. Penguin Press. George Washington was so appalled by them that he told Patrick Henry that if "systematically and pertinaciously pursued", they would "dissolve the union or produce coercion". Chernow, Ron. "Alexander Hamilton". 2004. p587. Penguin Press. The influence of Jefferson's doctrine of states' rights reverberated right up to the Civil War and beyond. Knott. "Alexander Hamilton and the Persistence of Myth". p48 Future president James Garfield, at the close of the Civil War, said that Jefferson's Kentucky Resolution "contained the germ of nullification and secession, and we are today reaping the fruits". Knott. "Alexander Hamilton and the Persistence of Myth". p48 

==See also==
* Alien Act of 1705 in England
* Alien Registration Act of 1940
* Sedition Act of 1918
* Logan Act
* Violent Radicalization and Homegrown Terrorism Prevention Act of 2007
* Nullification Crisis
* Espionage Act of 1917

== References ==

==Bibliography==
* Elkins, Stanley M. and Eric McKitrick, The Age of Federalism (1995), the standard scholarly history of the 1790s.
* Bill Ong Hing, Anthony D. Romero, Defining America Through Immigration Policy (Temple University Press, 2004), 17-19
* Jenkins, David. The Sedition Act of 1798 and the Incorporation of Seditious Libel into First Amendment Jurisprudence. The American Journal of Legal History, Vol. 45, No. 2 (Apr., 2001), pp. 154–213.
* Martin, James P. When Repression Is Democratic and Constitutional: The Federalist Theory of Representation and the Sedition Act of 1798. University of Chicago Law Review, Vol. 66, No. 1 (Winter, 1999), pp. 117–182
* Miller, John Chester. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (1951)
* Rehnquist, William H. Grand Inquests: The Historic Impeachments of Justice Samuel Chase and President Andrew Johnson (1994). Chase was impeached and acquitted for his conduct of a trial under the Sedition act.
* Rosenfeld, Richard N. American Aurora: A Democratic-Republican Returns: The Suppressed History of Our Nation's Beginnings and the Heroic Newspaper That Tried to Report It (1997), clippings from a Republican newspaper
* Smith, James Morton. Freedom's Fetters: The Alien and Sedition Laws and American Civil Liberties (1967)
* Stone, Geoffrey R.Perilous Times: Free Speech in Wartime from The Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism (2004)
* Alan Taylor, "The Alien and Sedition Acts" in Julian E. Zelizer, ed., The American Congress (2004), 63–76
* Wright, Barry. "Migration, Radicalism, and State Security: Legislative Initiatives in the Canada and the United States c. 1794–1804" in Studies in American Political Development, Volume 16, Issue 1, April 2002, 48–60

===Primary sources===
* Randolph, J.W. The Virginia Report of 1799–1800, Touching the Alien and Sedition Laws; together with the Virginia Resolutions of December 21, 1798, the Debate and Proceedings thereon in the House of Delegates of Virginia, and several other documents illustrative of the report and resolutions

==External links==

* Full Text of Alien and Sedition Acts
* Alien and Sedition Acts and Related Resources from the Library of Congress

Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798



[[Antinomy]]

Antinomy (Greek αντι-, for or instead of, plus νομος, law) literally means the mutual incompatibility, real or apparent, of two laws. It is a term used in logic and epistemology.

The term acquired a special significance in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), who used it to describe the equally rational but contradictory results of applying to the universe of pure thought the categories or criteria of reason proper to the universe of sensible perception or experience (phenomena). Empirical reason cannot here play the role of establishing rational truths because it goes beyond possible experience and is applied to the sphere of that which transcends it.

For Kant there are four antinomies, connected with:
#the limitation of the universe in respect of space and time,
#the theory that the whole consists of indivisible atoms (whereas, in fact, none such exist),
#the problem of free will in relation to universal causality
#the existence of a necessary being
For each of these a thesis is contradicted by an antithesis. For example: in the First Antinomy, Kant proves the thesis that time must have a beginning by showing that if time had no beginning, then an infinity would have elapsed up until the present moment. This is a manifest contradiction because infinity cannot, by definition, be completed by "successive synthesis" -- yet just such a finalizing synthesis would be required by the view that time is infinite; so the thesis is proven. Then he proves the antithesis, that time has no beginning, by showing that if time had a beginning, then there must have been "empty time" out of which time arose. This is incoherent (for Kant) for the following reason. Since, necessarily, no time elapses in this pretemporal void, then there could be no alteration, and therefore nothing (including time) would ever come to be: so the antithesis is proven. Reason makes equal claim to each proof, since they are both correct, so the question of the limits of time must be regarded as meaningless.

This was part of Kant's critical program of determining limits to science and philosophical inquiry. These contradictions are inherent in reason when it is applied to the world as it is in itself, independently of our perceptions of it (this has to do with the distinction between phenomena and noumena). Kant's goal in his critical philosophy was to identify what claims we are and are not justified in making, and the antinomies are a particularly illustrative example of his larger project.

==Related topics==

*Paradox
*Mereological nihilism – philosophical theory that may avoid antinomies

==References==

*John Watson, Selections from Kant (trans. Glasgow, 1897), pp. 155 foll.
*W. Windelband, History of Philosophy (Eng. trans. 1893)
*H. Sidgwick, Philos. of Kant, lectures x. and xi. (Lond., 1905)
*F. Paulsen, I. Kant (Eng. trans. 1902), pp. 216 foll. 
*
*



[[Ascending chain condition]]

The ascending chain condition (ACC) and descending chain condition (DCC) are finiteness properties satisfied by some algebraic structures, most importantly, ideals in certain commutative rings. Hazewinkel, Gubareni & Kirichenko (2004), p.6, Prop. 1.1.4. Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 366, Lemma 7.1 Jacobson (2009), p. 142 and 147 These conditions played an important role in the development of the structure theory of commutative rings in the works of David Hilbert, Emmy Noether, and Emil Artin.
The conditions themselves can be stated in an abstract form, so that they make sense for any partially ordered set. This point of view is useful in abstract algebraic dimension theory due to Gabriel and Rentschler.

== Definition ==
A partially ordered set (poset) P is said to satisfy the ascending chain condition (ACC) if every ascending chain of elements eventually terminates. Equivalently, given any sequence of elements of P
:
there exists a positive integer n such that
:
Similarly, P is said to satisfy the descending chain condition (DCC) if every descending chain of elements eventually terminates, or equivalently if any descending sequence
:
of elements of P eventually stabilizes (that is, there is no infinite descending chain).

=== Comments ===
*A subtly different and stronger condition than "containing no infinite ascending/descending chains" is "contains no arbitrarily long ascending/descending chains (optionally, 'based at a given element')". For instance, the disjoint union of the posets {0}, {0,1}, {0,1,2}, etc., satisfies both the ACC and the DCC, but has arbitrarily long chains. If one further identifies the 0 in all of these sets, then every chain is finite, but there are arbitrarily long chains based at 0.

*The descending chain condition on P is equivalent to P being well-founded: every nonempty subset of P has a minimal element (also called the minimal condition).

*Similarly, the ascending chain condition is equivalent to P being converse well-founded: every nonempty subset of P has a maximal element (the maximal condition).

*Every finite poset satisfies both ACC and DCC.

* A totally ordered set that satisfies the descending chain condition is called a well-ordered set.

== See also ==
* Artinian
* Noetherian
* Krull dimension
* Ascending chain condition for principal ideals

== Notes ==
 

== References ==
* Atiyah, M. F., and I. G. MacDonald, Introduction to Commutative Algebra, Perseus Books, 1969, ISBN 0-201-00361-9
* Michiel Hazewinkel, Nadiya Gubareni, V. V. Kirichenko. Algebras, rings and modules. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004. ISBN 1-4020-2690-0
* John B. Fraleigh, Victor J. Katz. A first course in abstract algebra. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 5 ed., 1967. ISBN 0-201-53467-3
* Nathan Jacobson. Basic Algebra I. Dover, 2009. ISBN 978-0-486-47189-1



[[Adin Steinsaltz]]

Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz (2006)
Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz (Hebrew: עדין שטיינזלץ) or Adin Even Yisrael (Hebrew: עדין אבן ישראל) (born 1937) is a teacher, philosopher, social critic, and spiritual mentor, who has been hailed by Time magazine as a "once-in-a-millennium scholar". He has devoted his life to making the Talmud accessible to all Jews. Jewish Literacy, Joseph Telushkin, William Morrow, 2001, p.541 Originally published in modern Hebrew, with a running commentary to facilitate learning, his Steinzaltz edition of the Talmud has also been translated into English, French, Russian and Spanish.

==Biography==
Born in Jerusalem in 1937 to secular parents, Steinsaltz studied mathematics, Steinsaltz, Adin; Shneur Zalman (of Lyady). Understanding the Tanya: Volume Three in the Definitive Commentary on a Classic Work of Kabbalah by the World's Foremost Authority. John Wiley and Sons, 2007, p.343 physics, and chemistry at the Hebrew University, Steinsaltz, Adin; Arthur Kurzweil. Pebbles of wisdom from Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz. John Wiley and Sons, 2009, p.331. in addition to rabbinical studies. Following graduation, he established several experimental schools after an unsuccessful attempt to start a neo-Hassidic community in the Negev desert, and, at the age of 23, became Israel’s youngest school principal. 

In 1965, he founded the Israel Institute for Talmudic Publications and began his monumental work on the Talmud, including translation into Hebrew, English, Russian, and various other languages. The Steinsaltz editions of the Talmud include translation from the original Aramaic and a comprehensive commentary. Steinsaltz completed his Hebrew edition of the entire Babylonian Talmud in November 2010, at which time Koren Publishers Jerusalem became the publisher of all of his works, including the Talmud. While not without criticism (e.g. by Neusner, 1998), the Steinsaltz edition is widely used throughout Israel, the United States and the world. Over 2 million volumes of the Steinsaltz Talmud have been distributed to date. The out of print Random House publication of is widely regarded as the most accurate and least redacted of any English language edition and is sought after on that basis by scholars and collectors. Controversial Talmud passages previously obscured, omitted entirely or confined to footnotes in English translations like the Soncino Talmud, receive full exposition in the Steinsaltz Talmud. Random House halted publication of the Steinsaltz Talmud after less than one-third of the English translation had been published. 

The Steinsaltz editions of the Talmud have opened up the world of Talmud study to thousands of people outside the walls of the traditional yeshiva, including women, who traditionally were not taught Talmud. Regarding the access that his work provides, Rabbi Steinsaltz says:

:“I never thought that spreading ignorance has any advantage, except for those who are in a position of power and want to deprive others of their rights and spread ignorance in order to keep them underlings.”

Rabbi Steinsaltz's classic work of Kabbalah, The Thirteen Petalled Rose, was first published in 1980 and now appears in eight languages. In all, Steinsaltz has authored some 60 books and hundreds of articles on subjects including Talmud, Jewish mysticism, Jewish philosophy, sociology, historical biography, and philosophy. Many of these works have been translated into English by his close personal friend, now deceased, Yehuda Hanegbi. All are published by Koren Publishers Jerusalem.

In the summer of 1989, a group of rabbis including Elazar Shach, Yosef Shalom Elyashiv, Eliezer Waldenberg (the Tzitz Eliezer), Aharon Leib Shteinman, Chaim Kanievsky, Michel Yehuda Lefkowitz, Chaim Kreiswirth, and Chaim Pinchas Scheinberg placed a ban on all of Steinsaltz's works. Printing the Talmud: From Bomberg to Schottenstein, Yeshiva University Museum, 2005, pg. 137. http://www.yoel-ab.com/katava.asp?id=115 Popularizing the Talmud: An analytical study of the Steinsaltz approach to the Talmud by Rabbi Joseph Elias - The Jewish Observer, January 1990, pgs. 18-27. Available here: http://www.jewswithquestions.com/index.php?app=core&module=attach&section=attach&attach_id=2 

Continuing his work as a teacher and spiritual mentor, Steinsaltz established a network of schools and educational institutions in Israel and the former Soviet Union. He has served as scholar in residence at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C. and the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. His honorary degrees include doctorates from Yeshiva University, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Bar Ilan University, Brandeis University, and Florida International University. Steinsaltz is also Rosh Yeshiva of Yeshivat Hesder Tekoa. 

Being a follower of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson of Chabad-Lubavitch, he went to help Jews in the Soviet Union assisting Chabad's shluchim network. Deeply involved in the future of the Jews in the former Soviet Union, Steinsaltz serves as the region's Duchovny Ravin, a historic Russian title which indicates that he is the spiritual mentor of Russian Jewry. In this capacity, Steinsaltz travelled to Russia and the Republics once each month from his home in Jerusalem. During his time in the former Soviet Union he founded the Jewish University, both in Moscow and Saint Petersburg. The Jewish University is the first degree-granting institution of Jewish studies in the former Soviet Union. 

Steinsaltz is sceptical about interfaith work. During a visit of a delegation of Roman Catholic cardinals in Manhattan in January 2004, he said that “a meeting like this doesn't signify in itself a breakthrough”, and called for “a theological dialogue that asks the tough questions, such as whether Catholicism allows for Jews to enter eternal paradise.” 

Steinsaltz and his wife live in Jerusalem, and have three children and more than ten grandchildren. His son, Rabbi Menachem Even-Israel, is the Director of Educational Programs at the Steinsaltz Center in the Nachlaot neighborhood of Jerusalem.

==Head of the new Sanhedrin==

Rabbi Steinsaltz accepted the position as Nasi (President) of the 2004 attempt to revive the Sanhedrin. In 2008 he resigned from this position due to differences of opinion. 

==As a speaker==
Steinsaltz is a popular University and radio commentator. He has been invited to speak at the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies at Yale University in 1979. In Jerusalem, he gives evening seminars, which according to Newsweek usually last till 2 in the morning, and have attracted prominent politicians as the former Prime Minister Levi Eshkol and former Finance Minister Pinhas Sapir. 

==Awards and critical reception==
Rabbi Steinsaltz has received many awards and prizes, among them the Israel Prize for Jewish studies in 1988. 

However not all reception of Steinsaltz' studies have been wholly positive. In the relatively calm academic world Jacob Neusner's combatively titled How Adin Steinsaltz Misrepresents the Talmud. Four False Propositions from his "Reference Guide." (1998) displays strong disagreement. "So to orient Steinsaltz to the discourse he manifestly has missed, I call to his attention the following works in ... of book reviews and criticism I have published over the past forty years: Judaic Law from Jesus to the Mishnah. ..." 

==See also==

*List of Israel Prize recipients
*Modern attempts to revive the Sanhedrin

==References==

==External links==
*Steinsaltz.org - The website of The Aleph Society and Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz
*Steinsaltz's lecture in winter 2005 at Florida International University
*Rabbi Steinsaltz talks about the Torah to BBC (sound file)
*Some articles written by Rabbi Adin Even-Yisrael Steinsaltz
*korenpub.com - The website of Koren Publishers Jerusalem
*hashefa.co.il -Rabbi Steinsaltz (even-Israel) center in Israel



[[A. E. Housman]]

Alfred Edward Housman (; 26 March 1859 – 30 April 1936), usually known as A. E. Housman, was an English classical scholar and poet, best known to the general public for his cycle of poems A Shropshire Lad. Lyrical and almost epigrammatic in form, the poems were mostly written before 1900. Their wistful evocation of doomed youth in the English countryside, in spare language and distinctive imagery, appealed strongly to late Victorian and Edwardian taste, and to many early 20th century English composers (beginning with Arthur Somervell) both before and after the First World War. Through its song-setting the poetry became closely associated with that era, and with Shropshire itself.

Housman was counted one of the foremost classicists of his age, and has been ranked as one of the greatest scholars of all time. 'a man who turned out to be not only the great English classical scholar of his time but also one of the few real and great scholars anywhere at any time'. Charles Oscar Brink, English Classical Scholarship: Historical reflections on Bentley, Porson and Housman, James Clarke & Co, Oxford, Oxford University Press, New York, 1986 p.149 He established his reputation publishing as a private scholar and, on the strength and quality of his work, was appointed Professor of Latin at University College London and later, at Cambridge. His editions of Juvenal, Manilius and Lucan are still considered authoritative.

==Life==
The eldest of seven children, Housman was born at Valley House in Fockbury, a hamlet on the outskirts of Bromsgrove in Worcestershire, to Sarah Jane (née Williams, married 17 Jun 1858 in Woodchester, Gloucester) "England Marriages, 1538–1973 for Edward Housman", Baptism record via FamilySearch.org and Edward Housman, and was baptised on 24 Apr 1859 at Christ Church, in Catshill. "England Births and Christenings, 1538-1975 for Alfred Edward Housman", Baptism record via FamilySearch.org Christ Church Catshill Profile at Poets.org His mother died on his 12th birthday, and his father, a country solicitor, later remarried, to an elder cousin, Lucy, in 1873. Housman's brother Laurence Housman and sister Clemence Housman also became writers.

Housman was educated first at King Edward's School, Birmingham, then Bromsgrove School, where he acquired a strong academic grounding and won prizes for his poetry. In 1877, he won an open scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, where he studied classics. Although by nature rather withdrawn, Housman formed strong friendships with two roommates, Moses Jackson and A. W. Pollard. Jackson became the great love of Housman's life, though the latter's feelings were not reciprocated, as Jackson was heterosexual. Summers (1995) p371 Housman obtained a first in classical Moderations in 1879, but his immersion in textual analysis, particularly with Propertius, led him to neglect ancient history and philosophy, which formed part of the Greats curriculum, and thus he failed to obtain a degree. Though some explain Housman's unexpected failure in his final exams as a result of Jackson's rejection, Cunningham (2000) p.981. most biographers adduce a variety of reasons, indifference to philosophy, overconfidence in his praeternatural gifts, a contempt for inexact learning, and enjoyment of idling away his time with Jackson, conjoined with news of his father's desperate illness as the more immediate and germane causes. Norman Page, Macmillan, London (1983) A. E. Housman: A Critical Biography pp.43-46 Richard Perceval Graves, A. E. Housman: The Scholar-Poet Charles Scribners, New York (1979) pp.52-55 Charles Oscar Brink, English Classical Scholarship pp.152 The failure left him with a deep sense of humiliation, and a determination to vindicate his genius.

After Oxford, Jackson got a job as a clerk in the Patent Office in London and arranged a job there for Housman as well. They shared a flat with Jackson's brother Adalbert until 1885 when Housman moved to lodgings of his own. Moses Jackson moved to India in 1887. When Jackson returned briefly to England in 1889 to marry, Housman not only was not invited to the wedding but knew nothing about it until the couple had left the country. Adalbert Jackson died in 1892. Housman continued pursuing classical studies independently and published scholarly articles on such authors as Horace, Propertius, Ovid, Aeschylus, Euripides and Sophocles. He gradually acquired such a high reputation that in 1892 he was offered the professorship of Latin at University College London, which he accepted. Many years later, the UCL academic staff common room was dedicated to his memory as the Housman Room.

The pleasures Housman enjoyed included gastronomy, flying in aeroplanes, and frequent visits to France, where he read "books which were banned in Britain as pornographic". Graves (1979) p155. A fellow don described him as being "descended from a long line of maiden aunts". Critchley (1988). 

Housman's grave at St. Laurence's Church in Ludlow. The cherry tree, on the right, was planted in his memory (see A Shropshire Lad, II).

Although Housman's early work and his sphere of responsibilities as professor included both Latin and Greek, he began to focus his energy on Latin poetry. When asked later why he had stopped writing about Greek poetry, he responded, "I found that I could not attain to excellence in both." Gow (Cambridge 1936) p5 In 1911, he took the Kennedy Professorship of Latin at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he remained for the rest of his life. Classics Professor G. P. Goold at University College, wrote of Housman's scholar's accomplishments: "The legacy of Housman's scholarship is a thing of permanent value; and that value consists less in obvious results, the establishment of general propositions about Latin and the removal of scribal mistakes, than in the shining example he provides of a wonderful mind at work.... He was and may remain the last great textual critic." During 1903–1930, he published his critical edition of Manilius's Astronomicon in five volumes. He also edited works of Juvenal (1905) and Lucan (1926). Many colleagues were unnerved by his scathing critical attacks on those whom he found guilty of shoddy scholarship. In his paper "The Application of Thought to Textual Criticism," (1921) Housman stated: "A textual critic engaged upon his business is not at all like Newton investigating the motion of the planets: he is much more like a dog hunting for fleas." He declared many of his contemporary scholars to be stupid, lazy, vain, or all three, proclaiming: "Knowledge is good, method is good, but one thing beyond all others is necessary; and that is to have a head, not a pumpkin, on your shoulders, and brains, not pudding, in your head." Poetry Foundation profile "The Application of Thought to Textual Criticism," (1921) Housman His younger colleague A. S. F. Gow quotes examples of these attacks, noting that they "were often savage in the extreme." Gow (Cambridge 1936) p24 Gow also relates how Housman intimidated his students, sometimes reducing them to tears. According to Gow, Housman could never remember his students' names, maintaining that "had he burdened his memory by the distinction between Miss Jones and Miss Robinson, he might have forgotten that between the second and fourth declension." One notable pupil was Enoch Powell. Gow (Cambridge 1936) p18 Housman found his true vocation in classical studies and treated poetry as a secondary activity. He did not speak about his poetry in public until 1933 when he gave a lecture, "The Name and Nature of Poetry", in which he argued that poetry should appeal to emotions rather than to the intellect.

Housman died aged 77, in Cambridge. His ashes are buried near St Laurence's Church, Ludlow, Shropshire. The University of Worcester has acknowledged Housman's local connection by naming a new building after him.

==Poetry ==
===A Shropshire Lad===

During his years in London, A. E. Housman completed A Shropshire Lad, a cycle of 63 poems. After several publishers had turned it down, he published it at his own expense in 1896. The volume surprised both his colleagues and students. At first selling slowly, it rapidly became a lasting success, and its appeal to English musicians had helped to make it widely known before World War I, when its themes struck a powerful chord with English readers. A Shropshire Lad has been in print continuously since May 1896. 

The poems are pervaded by deep pessimism and preoccupation with death, without religious consolation. Housman wrote most of them while living in Highgate, London, before ever visiting that part of Shropshire (about thirty miles from his home), which he presented in an idealised pastoral light, as his 'land of lost content'. A.. E Housman, A Shropshire Lad, XL Housman himself acknowledged the influence of the songs of William Shakespeare, the Scottish Border ballads and Heinrich Heine, but specifically denied any influence of Greek and Latin classics in his poetry.

===Later collections===
In the early 1920s, when Moses Jackson was dying in Canada, Housman wanted to assemble his best unpublished poems so that Jackson could read them before his death. These later poems, mostly written before 1910, show a greater variety of subject and form than those in A Shropshire Lad but lack the consistency of his previously published work. He published them as Last Poems (1922) because he felt his inspiration was exhausted and that he should not publish more in his lifetime. This proved true. After his death Housman's brother, Laurence, published further poems which appeared in More Poems (1936) and Collected Poems (1939). Housman also wrote a parodic Fragment of a Greek Tragedy, in English, and humorous poems published posthumously under the title Unkind to Unicorns.

John Sparrow found statements in a letter written late in Housman's life which describe how his poems came into existence:
Poetry was for him ...'a morbid secretion', as the pearl is for the oyster. The desire, or the need, did not come upon him often, and it came usually when he was feeling ill or depressed; then whole lines and stanzas would present themselves to him without any effort, or any consciousness of composition on his part. Sometimes they wanted a little alteration, sometimes none; sometimes the lines needed in order to make a complete poem would come later, spontaneously or with 'a little coaxing'; sometimes he had to sit down and finish the poem with his head. That .... was a long and laborious process. 

Sparrow himself adds, "How difficult it is to achieve a satisfactory analysis may be judged by considering the last poem in A Shropshire Lad. Of its four stanzas, Housman tells us that two were 'given' him ready made; one was coaxed forth from his subconsciousness an hour or two later; the remaining one took months of conscious composition. No one can tell for certain which was which." Collected Poems Penguin, Harmondsworth (1956), preface by John Sparrow. 

===De Amicitia (about friendship)===
In 1942 Laurence Housman also deposited an essay entitled "A. E. Housman's 'De Amicitia'" in the British Library, with the proviso that it was not to be published for 25 years. The essay discussed A. E. Housman's homosexuality and his love for Jackson. Summers ed. 1995, 371. Despite the conservative nature of the times, Housman, as distinct from the prudence of his public life, was quite open in his poetry, and especially his A Shropshire Lad, about his deeper sympathies. Poem 30 of that sequence, for instance, speaks of how "Fear contended with desire": "Others, I am not the first / have willed more mischief than they durst". In More Poems, he buries his love for Moses Jackson in the very act of commemorating it, as his feelings of love break his friendship, and must be carried silently to the grave: Summers (1995) p372. .

Because I liked you better
Than suits a man to say
It irked you, and I promised
To throw the thought away.

To put the world between us
We parted, stiff and dry;
Goodbye, said you, forget me.
I will, no fear, said I

If here, where clover whitens
The dead man's knoll, you pass,
And no tall flower to meet you
Starts in the trefoiled grass,

Halt by the headstone naming
The heart no longer stirred,
And say the lad that loved you
Was one that kept his word. A. E. Housman, More Poems, Jonathan Cape, London 1936 p.48 

His poem, "Oh who is that young sinner with the handcuffs on his wrists?", written after the trial of Oscar Wilde, addressed more general social injustice towards homosexuality. Housman (1937) p213. In the poem the prisoner is suffering "for the colour of his hair", a natural, given attribute which, in a clearly coded reference to homosexuality, is reviled as "nameless and abominable" (recalling the legal phrase peccatum horribile, inter christianos non nominandum, "the horrible sin, not to be named amongst Christians").

==Housman in other art forms==
===Music and art song===
Housman's poetry, especially A Shropshire Lad, provided texts for a significant number of British, and in particular English, composers in the first half of the 20th century. The national, pastoral and traditional elements of his style resonated with similar trends in English music. The first was probably the cycle A Shropshire Lad set by Arthur Somervell in 1904, who had begun to develop the concept of the English song-cycle in his version of Tennyson's Maud a little previously. Ralph Vaughan Williams produced his most famous settings of six songs, the cycle On Wenlock Edge, for string quartet, tenor and piano (dedicated to Gervase Elwes) in 1909, W. and R. Elwes, Gervase Elwes, The Story of his Life (Grayson and Grayson, London 1935), p195-97. and it became very popular after Elwes recorded it with the London String Quartet and Frederick B. Kiddle in 1917. Between 1909 and 1911 George Butterworth produced settings in two collections or cycles, as Six Songs from A Shropshire Lad, and Bredon Hill and other songs. He also wrote an orchestral tone poem on A Shropshire Lad (first performed at Leeds Festival under Arthur Nikisch in 1912). Arthur Eaglefield Hull, A Dictionary of Modern Music and Musicians Dent, London (1924), 73. 

Butterworth's death on the Somme in 1916 was considered a great loss to English music; Ivor Gurney, another most important setter of Housman (Ludlow and Teme, a work for voice and string quartet, and a song-cycle on Housman works, both of which won the Carnegie Award) Eaglefield-Hull (1924) p205. experienced emotional breakdowns which were popularly (but wrongly) believed to have originated from shell-shock. Hence the fatalistic strain of the poems, and the earlier settings, foreshadowed responses to the universal bereavement of the First World War and became assimilated into them. This was reinforced when their foremost interpreter and performer, Gervase Elwes (who had initiated the music festivals at Brigg in Lincolnshire at which Percy Grainger and others had developed their collections of country music W. and R. Elwes (1935) p156-166. ) died in a horrific accident in 1921. Elwes had been closely identified with English wartime morale, having given six benefit performances of The Dream of Gerontius on consecutive nights in 1916, and many concerts in France in 1917 for British soldiers. W. & R. Elwes (1935) pp244-55. 

Among other composers who set Housman songs were John Ireland (song cycle, Land of Lost Content), Michael Head (e.g. 'Ludlow Fair'), Graham Peel (a famous version of 'In Summertime on Bredon'), Ian Venables (Songs of Eternity and Sorrow), and the American Samuel Barber (e.g. 'With rue my heart is laden'). Gerald Finzi repeatedly began settings, though never finished any. Even composers not directly associated with the 'pastoral' tradition, such as Arnold Bax, Lennox Berkeley and Arthur Bliss, were attracted to Housman's poetry. A 1976 catalogue listed 400 musical settings of Housman's poems. Palmer and Banfield 2001. Housman's poetry influenced British music in a way comparable to that of Walt Whitman in the music of Delius, Vaughan Williams and others: Housman's works provided song texts, Whitman's the texts for larger choral works. The contemporary New Zealand composer David Downes includes a setting of "March" on his CD The Rusted Wheel of Things.

===Works titled after Housman===
Housman is the main character in the 1997 Tom Stoppard play The Invention of Love. 'Guardian article"Hades and gentlemen" 5 October 1997 Many titles for novels and films have been drawn from Housman's poetry. The line "There's this to say for blood and breath,/ they give a man a taste for death" supplies the title for Peter O'Donnell's 1969 Modesty Blaise thriller, A Taste for Death, also the inspiration for P. D. James' 1986 crime novel, A Taste for Death, the seventh in her Adam Dalgliesh series. The last words of the poem "On Wenlock Edge" are used by Audrey R. Langer for the title of the 1989 novel Ashes Under Uricon. The Nobel Prize winning novelist Patrick White named his 1955 novel The Tree of Man after a line in A Shropshire Lad and Arthur C. Clarke's first novel, Against the Fall of Night, is taken from a work in Housman's More Poems. The 2009 novel Blood's a Rover by James Ellroy takes its title from Housman's poem "Reveille", Poets' Corner - A. E. Housman - A Shropshire Lad and a line from Housman's poem XVI "How Clear, How Lovely Bright", was used for the title of the last Inspector Morse book The Remorseful Day by Colin Dexter. Blue Remembered Hills, a television play by Dennis Potter, takes its title from "Into My Heart an Air That Kills" from A Shropshire Lad, Bartleby.com the cycle also providing the name for the James Bond film Die Another Day: "But since the man that runs away / Lives to die another day".

==Works==
===Poetry collections ===
*A Shropshire Lad (1896)
* (1922)
*Shropshire Lad: Authorized Edition: Henry Holt and Company] (1924)
*More Poems: Barclays Bank LTD. (1936)
* (1940)
*Collected Poems (1939); the poems included in this volume but not the three above are known as Additional Poems. The Penguin Edition of 1956 includes an Introduction by John Sparrow.
*Manuscript Poems: Eight Hundred Lines of Hitherto Un-collected Verse from the Author's Notebooks, ed. Tom Burns Haber (1955)
*Is My Team Ploughing
*Unkind to Unicorns: Selected Comic Verse, ed. J. Roy Birch (1995; 2nd ed. 1999)
*The Poems of A.E. Housman, ed. Archie Burnett (1997)

===Classical scholarship===
*M. Manilii Astronomica (1903–1930; 2nd ed. 1937; 5 vols.)
*D. Iunii Iuuenalis Saturae: editorum in usum edidit (1905; 2nd ed. 1931)
*M. Annaei Lucani, Belli Ciuilis, Libri Decem: editorum in usum edidit (1926; 2nd ed. 1927)
*The Classical Papers of A. E. Housman, ed. J. Diggle and F. R. D. Goodyear (1972; 3 vols.)
*William White, "Housman's Latin Inscriptions", CJ (1955) 159 - 166

===Published lectures===
These lectures are listed by date of delivery, with date of first publication given separately if different.
*Introductory Lecture (1892)
*"Swinburne" (1910; published 1969)
*Cambridge Inaugural Lecture (1911; published 1969 as "The Confines of Criticism")
*"The Application of Thought to Textual Criticism" (1921; published 1922)
*"The Name and Nature of Poetry" (1933)

===Prose collections===
Selected Prose, edited by John Carter, Cambridge University Press, 1961

===Collected letters===
*The Letters of A. E. Housman, ed. Henry Maas (1971)
*The Letters of A. E. Housman, ed. Archie Burnett (2007)

==Footnotes==

==Sources==
*Critchley, Julian, 'Homage to a lonely lad', Weekend Telegraph (UK), 23 April 1988.
*Cunningham, Valentine ed., The Victorians: An Anthology of Poetry and Poetics (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000)
*Gow, A. S. F., A. E. Housman: A Sketch Together with a List of his Writings and Indexes to his Classical Papers (Cambridge 1936)
*Graves, Richard Perceval, A.E. Housman: The Scholar-Poet (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979), p. 155
*Housman, Laurence, A. E .H.: Some Poems, Some Letters and a Personal Memoir by his Brother (London: Jonathan Cape, 1937)
*Page, Norman, ‘Housman, Alfred Edward (1859–1936)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004)
*Palmer, Christopher and Stephen Banfield, 'A. E. Housman', The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (London: Macmillan, 2001)
*Shaw, Robin, "Housman's Places" (The Housman Society, 1995)
*Summers, Claude J. ed., The Gay and Lesbian Literary Heritage (New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1995)

==Further reading==
* Brink, C. O. Lutterworth.com, English Classical Scholarship: Historical Reflections on Bentley, Porson and Housman, James Clarke & Co (2009), ISBN 978-0-227-17299-5.
*C. Efrati, The road of danger, guilt, and shame: the lonely way of A. E. Housman (Associated University Presse, 2002) ISBN 0-8386-3906-2
*Philip Gardner ed., A. E. Housman: The Critical Heritage, a collection of reviews and essays on Housman’s poetry (London: Routledge 1992)
*Holden, A. W. and J. R. Birch, A. E Housman - A Reassessment (Palgrave Macmillan, London 1999)

==See also==
*The Invention of Love

==External links==

*Profile and poems at Poets.org
*Profile and poems at Poetry Foundation
*London Review of Books review of "The Letters of A.E. Housman" 5 July 2007
*BBC Profile 24 June 2009
*"Star man": An article in the TLS by Robert Douglas Fairhurst, 20 June 2007
* "Lost Horizon: The sad and savage wit of A. E. Housman" New Yorker article (5 pages) by Anthony Lane 19 February 2001
*The Housman Society

===Works===
* 
* 
* 
*Free Housman audio readings at Librivox



[[Attribution of recent climate change]]

Attribution of recent climate change is the effort to scientifically ascertain mechanisms responsible for recent changes observed in the Earth's climate. The effort has focused on changes observed during the period of instrumental temperature record, when records are most reliable; particularly on the last 50 years, when human activity has grown fastest and observations of the troposphere have become available. The dominant mechanisms (to which recent climate change has been attributed) are the result of human activity. They are: 

* increasing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases
* global changes to land surface, such as deforestation
* increasing atmospheric concentrations of aerosols.

There are also natural mechanisms for variation including climate oscillations, changes in solar activity, variations in the Earth's orbit, and volcanic activity.

Attribution of recent change to anthropogenic forcing is based on the following facts:

* The observed change is not consistent with natural variability.
* Known natural forcings would, if anything, be negative over this period.
* Known anthropogenic forcings are consistent with the observed response.
* The pattern of the observed change is consistent with the anthropogenic forcing.

Recent reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) have concluded that:

* "Most of the observed increase in globally averaged temperatures since the mid-20th century is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations"; IPCC, 
Summary for Policymakers, Section ?? in . It is extremely unlikely (<5%) that the global pattern of warming during the past half century can be explained without external forcing (i.e., it is inconsistent with being the result of internal variability), and very unlikely that it is due to known natural external causes alone. The warming occurred in both the ocean and the atmosphere and took place at a time when natural external forcing factors would likely have produced cooling. Hegerl et al., Chapter 9, Section ?? in . 
* "From new estimates of the combined anthropogenic forcing due to greenhouse gases, aerosols, and land surface changes, it is extremely likely that human activities have exerted a substantial net warming influence on climate since 1750." 
* "It is virtually certain that anthropogenic aerosols produce a net negative radiative forcing (cooling influence) with a greater magnitude in the Northern Hemisphere than in the Southern Hemisphere. 

The panel defines "very likely," "extremely likely," and "virtually certain" as indicating probabilities greater than 90%, 95%, and 99%, respectively. 
The IPCC's attribution of recent global warming to human activities is a view shared by most scientists, "The IPCC’s conclusion that most of the observed warming of the last 50 years is likely to have been due to the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations accurately reflects the current thinking of the scientific community on this issue" (page 3). "Most scientists agree that the warming in recent decades has been caused primarily by human activities that have increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere " (page 2). 
and is also supported by a number of scientific organizations (see scientific opinion on climate change).

==Background==

Atmospheric CO2 concentrations and global annual average temperatures over the years 1880 to 2009.

This section introduces some concepts in climate science that are used in the following sections:

Factors affecting Earth's climate can be broken down into feedbacks and forcings. 
 
A forcing is something that is imposed externally on the climate system. External forcings include natural phenomena such as volcanic eruptions and variations in the sun's output. Le Treut et al., Chapter 1: Historical Overview of Climate Change Science, FAQ 1.1, What Factors Determine Earth’s Climate?, in . Human activities can also impose forcings, for example, through changing the composition of the atmosphere.

Radiative forcing is a measure of how various factors alter the energy balance of the Earth's atmosphere. Forster et al., Chapter 2: Changes in Atmospheric Constituents and Radiative Forcing, FAQ 2.1, How do Human Activities Contribute to Climate Change and How do They Compare with Natural Influences? in . A positive radiative forcing will tend to increase the energy of the Earth-atmosphere system, leading to a warming of the system. Between the start of the Industrial Revolution in 1750, and the year 2005, the increase in the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (chemical formula: CO2) lead to a positive radiative forcing, averaged over the Earth's surface area, of about 1.66 watts per square metre (abbreviated W m-2). IPCC, Summary for Policymakers, Human and Natural Drivers of Climate Change, Figure SPM.2, in . 

Climate feedbacks can either amplify or dampen the response of the climate to a given forcing. 
There are many feedback mechanisms in the climate system that can either amplify (a positive feedback) or diminish (a negative feedback) the effects of a change in climate forcing.

Aspects of the climate system will show variation in response to changes in forcings. 

 
In the absence of forcings imposed on it, the climate system will still show internal variability. This internal variability is a result of complex interactions between components of the climate system, such as the coupling between the atmosphere and ocean. Albritton et al., Technical Summary, Box 1: What drives changes in climate?, in . An example of internal variability is the El Niño-Southern Oscillation.

==Key attributions==
=== Greenhouse gases ===
Emission Database for Global Atmospheric Research version 3.2, fast track 2000 project
Scientific consensus has identified carbon dioxide as the dominant greenhouse gas forcing. (The dominant greenhouse gas overall is water vapor. Water vapor, however, has a very short atmospheric lifetime (about 10 days) and is very nearly in a dynamic equilibrium in the atmosphere, so it is not a forcing gas in the context of global warming. ) Methane and nitrous oxide are also major forcing contributors to the greenhouse effect. The Kyoto Protocol lists these together with hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), which are entirely artificial (i.e. anthropogenic) gases which also contribute to radiative forcing in the atmosphere. The chart at right attributes anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions to eight main economic sectors, of which the largest contributors are power stations (many of which burn coal or other fossil fuels), industrial processes (among which cement production is a dominant contributor Solomon et al., 
Technical Summary, Section ??
p. ?. in . ), transportation fuels (generally fossil fuels), and agricultural by-products (mainly methane from enteric fermentation and nitrous oxide from fertilizer use).

===Land use===
Climate change is attributed to land use for two main reasons.
While 66% of anthropogenic dioxide|] emissions over the last 250 years have resulted from burning fossil fuels, 33% have resulted from changes in land use, primarily deforestation. Deforestation both reduces the amount of carbon dioxide absorbed by deforested regions and releases greenhouse gases directly, together with aerosols, through biomass burning that frequently accompanies it.
A second reason that climate change has been attributed to land use is that the terrestrial albedo is often altered by use, which leads to radiative forcing. This effect is more significant locally than globally. 

====Livestock and land use====
Worldwide, livestock production occupies 70% of all land used for agriculture, or 30% of the ice-free land surface of the Earth. 
More than 18% of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions are attributed to livestock and livestock-related activities such as deforestation and increasingly fuel-intensive farming practices. Specific attributions to the livestock sector include:
* 9% of global anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions
* 35–40% of global anthropogenic methane emissions (chiefly due to enteric fermentation and manure)
* 64% of global anthropogenic nitrous oxide emissions, chiefly due to fertilizer use. 

===Aerosols===
With virtual certainty, scientific consensus has attributed various forms of climate change, chiefly cooling effects, to aerosols, which are small particles or droplets suspended in the atmosphere. ?? in . 
Key sources to which anthropogenic aerosols are attributed include:

* biomass burning such as slash and burn deforestation. Aerosols produced are primarily black carbon.
* industrial air pollution, which produces soot and airborne sulfates, nitrates, and ammonium
* dust produced by land use effects such as desertification

== Attribution of 20th century climate change ==

One global climate model's reconstruction of temperature change during the 20th century as the result of five studied forcing factors and the amount of temperature change attributed to each.

Over the past 150 years human activities have released increasing quantities of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. This has led to increases in mean global temperature, or global warming. Other human effects are relevant—for example, sulphate aerosols are believed to have a cooling effect. Natural factors also contribute. According to the historical temperature record of the last century, the Earth's near-surface air temperature has risen around 0.74 ± 0.18 °Celsius (1.3 ± 0.32 °Fahrenheit).

A historically important question in climate change research has regarded the relative importance of human activity and non-anthropogenic causes during the period of instrumental record. In the 1995 Second Assessment Report (SAR), the IPCC made the widely quoted statement that "The balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate". The phrase "balance of evidence" suggested the (English) common-law standard of proof required in civil as opposed to criminal courts: not as high as "beyond reasonable doubt". In 2001 the Third Assessment Report (TAR) refined this, saying "There is new and stronger evidence that most of the warming observed over the last 50 years is attributable to human activities". The 2007 Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) strengthened this finding:
* "Anthropogenic warming of the climate system is widespread and can be detected in temperature observations taken at the surface, in the free atmosphere and in the oceans. Evidence of the effect of external influences, both anthropogenic and natural, on the climate system has continued to accumulate since the TAR." Solomon et al., Technical Summary, p. ?. in . )

Over the past five decades there has been a global warming of approximately 0.65 °C (1.17 °F) at the Earth's surface (see historical temperature record). Among the possible factors that could produce changes in global mean temperature are internal variability of the climate system, external forcing, an increase in concentration of greenhouse gases, or any combination of these. Current studies indicate that the increase in greenhouse gases, most notably , is mostly responsible for the observed warming. Evidence for this conclusion includes:

* Estimates of internal variability from climate models, and reconstructions of past temperatures, indicate that the warming is unlikely to be entirely natural.
* Climate models forced by natural factors and increased greenhouse gases and aerosols reproduce the observed global temperature changes; those forced by natural factors alone do not. IPCC, Summary for Policymakers. in . 
* "Fingerprint" methods indicate that the pattern of change is closer to that expected from greenhouse gas-forced change than from natural change. Mitchell et al., Chapter 12: Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes Section 12.4.3, Optimal Fingerprint Methods, in . 
* The plateau in warming from the 1940s to 1960s can be attributed largely to sulphate aerosol cooling. Figure 4, Simulated annual global mean surface temperatures, in . 

==Detection vs. attribution==

This graph is known as the "Keeling Curve" and it shows the long-term increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations from 1958-2008. Monthly CO2 measurements display seasonal oscillations in an upward trend; each year's maximum occurs during the Northern Hemisphere's late spring, and declines during its growing season as plants remove some atmospheric CO2.

Detection and attribution of climate signals, as well as its common-sense meaning, has a more precise definition within the climate change literature, as expressed by the IPCC. Mitchell et al., Chapter 12: Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes, Section 12.1.1: The Meaning of Detection and Attribution, in . 

Detection of a signal requires demonstrating that an observed change is statistically significantly different from that which can be explained by natural internal variability.

Attribution requires demonstrating that a signal is:

* unlikely to be due entirely to internal variability;
* consistent with the estimated responses to the given combination of anthropogenic and natural forcing
* not consistent with alternative, physically plausible explanations of recent climate change that exclude important elements of the given combination of forcings.

Detection does not imply attribution, and is easier to show than attribution. Unequivocal attribution would require controlled experiments with multiple copies of the climate system, which is not possible. Therefore, attribution, as described above, can only be done within some margin of error. For example, the IPCC's Fourth Assessment Report says "it is extremely likely that human activities have exerted a substantial net warming influence on climate since 1750," where "extremely likely" indicates a probability greater than 95%. 

Following the publication of the Third Assessment Report (TAR) in 2001, "detection and attribution" of climate change has remained an active area of research. Some important results include:

* A review of detection and attribution studies by the International Ad Hoc Detection and Attribution Group found that "natural drivers such as solar variability and volcanic activity are at most partially responsible for the large-scale temperature changes observed over the past century, and that a large fraction of the warming over the last 50 yr can be attributed to greenhouse gas increases. Thus, the recent research supports and strengthens the IPCC Third Assessment Report conclusion that 'most of the global warming over the past 50 years is likely due to the increase in greenhouse gases.'"
* Multiple independent reconstructions of the temperature record of the past 1000 years confirm that the late 20th century is probably the warmest period in that time
* Two papers in the journal Science in August 2005 
 resolve the problem, evident at the time of the TAR, of tropospheric temperature trends. The UAH version of the record contained errors, and there is evidence of spurious cooling trends in the radiosonde record, particularly in the tropics. See satellite temperature measurements for details; and the 2006 US CCSP report. 
 
* Barnett and colleagues say that the observed warming of the oceans "cannot be explained by natural internal climate variability or solar and volcanic forcing, but is well simulated by two anthropogenically forced climate models," concluding that "it is of human origin, a conclusion robust to observational sampling and model differences" 

== Scientific literature and opinion ==

There are a number of examples of published and informal support for the consensus view. The IPCC's Assessment Reports have informed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, . 
and each assessment has considered the role of human activities on the climate. Cubasch et al., Chapter 9: Projections of Future Climate Change, Section 9.1.3: The Basis from which We Begin, in . 
The IPCC's First Assessment Report, published in 1990, was unable to distinguish a human influence on the climate. The later Second Assessment Report, published in 1996, concluded that human influences had had a "discernable" effect on the climate. More evidence of human-induced climate change was found in the third and fourth Assessment Reports, published in 2001 and 2007, respectively.

The IPCC's conclusions are consistent with those of several reports produced by the US National Research Council. 
A report published in 2009 by the U.S. Global Change Research Program concluded that " warming is unequivocal and primarily human-induced." , Excutive Summary, p. 12. 
A number of scientific organizations have issued statements that support the consensus view. Two examples include:
*a joint statement made in 2005 by the national science academies of the G8, and Brazil, China and India; 
*a joint statement made in 2008 by the Network of African Science Academies. 

===Individual papers===

* An essay in Science surveyed 928 abstracts related to climate change, and concluded that most journal reports accepted the consensus. This is discussed further in scientific opinion on climate change.
* A 2002 paper in the Journal of Geophysical Research says "Our analysis suggests that the early twentieth century warming can best be explained by a combination of warming due to increases in greenhouse gases and natural forcing, some cooling due to other anthropogenic forcings, and a substantial, but not implausible, contribution from internal variability. In the second half of the century we find that the warming is largely caused by changes in greenhouse gases, with changes in sulphates and, perhaps, volcanic aerosol offsetting approximately one third of the warming." 
* In 1996, in a paper in Nature titled "A search for human influences on the thermal structure of the atmosphere", Benjamin D. Santer et al. wrote: "The observed spatial patterns of temperature change in the free atmosphere from 1963 to 1987 are similar to those predicted by state-of-the-art climate models incorporating various combinations of changes in carbon dioxide, anthropogenic sulphate aerosol and stratospheric ozone concentrations. The degree of pattern similarity between models and observations increases through this period. It is likely that this trend is partially due to human activities, although many uncertainties remain, particularly relating to estimates of natural variability."

A small minority of scientists do disagree with the consensus: see list of scientists opposing global warming consensus. For example Willie Soon and Richard Lindzen say that there is insufficient proof for anthropogenic attribution. Generally this position requires new physical mechanisms to explain the observed warming. for example: 

==Difficulties in attribution==

At the time of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, attribution was possible for a number of observed changes in the climate (see effects of global warming). However, attribution was found to be more difficult when assessing changes over smaller regions (less than continental scale) and over short time periods (less than 50 years). Hegerl et al., Chapter 9: Understanding and Attributing Climate Change, Executive Summary, in 
. 
Over larger regions, averaging reduces natural variability of the climate, making detection and attribution easier.

==Solar activity==

right

The role of the sun in recent climate change has been looked at by climate scientists. Since 1978, output from the Sun has been precisely measured by satellites. 
These measurements indicate that the Sun's output has not increased since 1978, so the warming during the past 30 years cannot be attributed to an increase in solar energy reaching the Earth (see the graph opposite). In the three decades since 1978, the combination of solar and volcanic activity probably had a slight cooling influence on the climate. Global Climate Change, in , pp. 15-16. 

Climate models have been used to examine the role of the sun in recent climate change. Hegerl, et al., Chapter 9: Understanding and Attributing Climate Change, Frequently Asked Question 9.2: Can the Warming of the 20th century be Explained by Natural Variability?, in . 
Models are unable to reproduce the rapid warming observed in recent decades when they only take into account variations in solar output and volcanic activity. Models are, however, able to simulate the observed 20th century changes in temperature when they include all of the most important external forcings, including human influences and natural forcings. As has already been stated, Hegerl et al. (2007) concluded that greenhouse gas forcing had "very likely" caused most of the observed global warming since the mid-20th century. In making this conclusion, Hegerl et al. (2007) allowed for the possibility that climate models had been underestimated the effect of solar forcing. Hegerl, et al., Chapter 9: Understanding and Attributing Climate Change, Executive Summary, in
. 

The role of solar activity in climate change has also been calculated over longer time periods using "proxy" datasets, such as tree rings. 
 
Models indicate that solar and volcanic forcings can explain periods of relative warmth and cold between A.D. 1000 and 1900, but human-induced forcings are needed to reproduce the late-20th century warming. 
 

Another line of evidence against the sun having caused recent climate change comes from looking at how temperatures at different levels in the Earth's atmosphere have changed. 
 
Models and observations show that greenhouse warming results in warming of the lower atmosphere (called the troposphere) but cooling of the upper atmosphere (called the stratosphere). Hegerl et al., Chapter 9: Understanding and Attributing Climate Change, Frequently Asked Question 9.2: Can the Warming of the 20th century be Explained by Natural Variability?, in . Depletion of the ozone layer by chemical refrigerants has also resulted in a strong cooling effect in the stratosphere. If the sun was responsible for observed warming, warming of both the troposphere and stratosphere would be expected. , p. 20. 

===Non-consensus views===

Habibullo Abdussamatov (2004), head of space research at St. Petersburg's Pulkovo Astronomical Observatory in Russia, has argued that the sun is responsible for recently observed climate change. 
 "The main cause of climate change during the last millennia is the corresponding cyclic variation of the 80- and 200-year component of irradiance correlated with activity. That is why, the contemporary (climate change) is not anomalous but is ordinary secular global warming."
 
Journalists for news sources canada.com (Solomon, 2007b), 

 
National Geographic News (Ravillious, 2007), 

 
and LiveScience (Than, 2007) 

 
reported on the story of warming on Mars. In these articles, Abdussamatov was quoted. He stated that warming on Mars was evidence that global warming on Earth was being caused by changes in the sun.

Ravillious (2007) 
quoted two scientists who disagreed with Abdussamatov: Amato Evan, a climate scientist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, in the US, and Colin Wilson, a planetary physicist at Oxford University in the UK. According to Wilson, "Wobbles in the orbit of Mars are the main cause of its climate change in the current era" (see also orbital forcing). See also: 
 
Than (2007) quoted Charles Long, a climate physicist at Pacific Northwest National Laboratories in the US, who disagreed with Abdussamatov. 

Than (2007) pointed to the view of Benny Peiser, a social anthropologist at Liverpool John Moores University in the UK. 
In his newsletter, Peiser had cited a blog which had commented on warming observed on several planetary bodies in the Solar system. These included Neptune's moon Triton, See also: 
 Jupiter, See also: 
 Pluto See also: 
 and Mars. In an e-mail interview with Than (2007), Peiser stated that:“I think it is an intriguing coincidence that warming trends have been observed on a number of very diverse planetary bodies in our solar system, (...) Perhaps this is just a fluke.”Than (2007) provided alternative explanations of why warming had occurred on Triton, Pluto, Jupiter and Mars.

The US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA, 2009) responded to public comments on climate change attribution. 
 A number of commenters had argued that recent climate change could be attributed to changes in solar irradiance. According to the US EPA (2009), this attribution was not supported by the bulk of the scientific literature. Citing the work of the IPCC (2007), the US EPA pointed to the low contribution of solar irradiance to radiative forcing since the start of the Industrial Revolution in 1750. Over this time period (1750 to 2005), IPCC, Summary for Policymakers,
Human and Natural Drivers of Climate Change, in . the estimated contribution of solar irradiance to radiative forcing was 5% the value of the combined radiative forcing due to increases in the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide.

==Earlier climate changes==

 Fluctuations in temperature and atmospheric concentration of CO2 over the past 649,000 years.

Factors other than increased concentrations can initiate warming or cooling episodes (see, e.g., orbital forcing). The ice core record shows that on some occasions temperature starts rising hundreds of years before increases. Such results confirm that the relationship between and climate can go in both directions: changes in concentrations affect climate, while changes in climate can affect concentrations. One proposed mechanism for this effect is increased release of sequestered from oceans as circulation patterns shift, perhaps abruptly, in response to climate change. 

A more speculative and polemical inference sometimes drawn is that the causal relationship between temperature rises and global concentrations is only one-way, so that historical increases in have been nothing more than the product of independently rising temperatures. The Great Global Warming Swindle However, a strictly "one-way" view of the relationship between and temperature contradicts basic results in physics, specifically the fact that the absorption and emission of infrared radiation by increases as its atmospheric concentration increases. 
 
 

First principles as well as empirical observation suggest that positive feedbacks from concentrations amplify warming initially caused by other factors:
Close analysis of the relationship between the two curves temperature and shows that, within the uncertainties of matching their timescales, the temperature led by a few centuries. This is expected, since it was changes in the Earth’s orbital parameters (including the shape of its orbit around the Sun, and the tilt of Earth’s axis) that caused the small initial temperature rise. This then raised atmospheric levels, in part by outgassing from the oceans, causing the temperature to rise further. By amplifying each other’s response, this "positive feedback" can turn a small initial perturbation into a large climate change. There is therefore no surprise that the temperature and rose in parallel, with the temperature initially in advance. In the current case, the situation is different, because human actions are raising the level, and we are starting to observe the temperature response. 

Present levels greatly exceed the range found in the ice core data. Isotopic analysis of atmospheric confirms that fossil fuel burning is the source of most of the increase, unlike during prior interglacial periods. Schimel et al., Chapter 2: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change, Section 2.1.3: Concentration Projections and Stabilisation Calculations, p. 82 (and pp. 76–86 generally) in . As noted above, models that include increased levels when simulating recent climate match the observed data far better than those that do not. 

==See also==

* Aviation and climate change
* Climate attribution

==Notes==

==References==
*.
* (pb: ).

* (pb: ).

* (pb: ).

*.

==Further reading==
* RealClimate – Le Quéré, How much of the recent increase is due to human activities?, 2005
* 

==External links==
* RealClimate – Blog on current climate change issues by active climatologists
* "The Climate of Man", The New Yorker (2005): Part 1, Part 2, Part 3
* Anthropogenic or Solar? by Shaviv
* Recent oppositely directed trends in solar climate forcings and the global mean surface air temperature by Mike Lockwood and Claus Frohlich
* US EPA climate change and global warming website
* ResearchChannel – How Do We Know? Physics, Forcings, and Fingerprints. A video by the National Science Foundation on climate change.
* Scientific American editors' blog – Extended discussion of climate attribution



[[Achduart]]

Achduart (Gaelic: Achadh Dhubhaird ) is a small hamlet in Coigach, in Wester Ross in northwestern Scotland, now within the Highland council area. It is situated about 4 km southeast of the village of Achiltibuie, at the end of a minor road. A footpath continues on to the hamlet of Culnacraig, then along the coast past Ben More Coigach to Strathcanaird. 
Achduart has accommodation facilities for tourists, who come for its proximity to the ocean as well as its seclusion and remoteness. There is a Scottish Youth Hostels Association hostel in Acheninver, a short distance to the north.

The name of Achduart comes from the Gaelic for "the field at the black headland". Achduart was part of the Estate of Coigach, Lochbroom, belonging to the Countess of Cromartie. 

The dominant geographical feature in the area is Cairn Conmheall, which rises to 541 metres.

==Notable people==
*Kenny John Macleod -fiddler All Celtic Music 

==References==

==External links==
*Coigach Genealogy



[[Achiltibuie]]

Achiltibuie ( or Field of the yellow-haired boy Mac an Tàilleir, Iain (2003), "Gaelic Place Names" http://www.scottish.parliament.uk/Gaelic/placenamesA-B.pdf Retrieved on January 1, 2012 ) is a long linear village in Ross and Cromarty, Highland, on the Coigach coast of northwestern Scotland, overlooking Badentarbet Bay to the west. Loch Broom and the Summer Isles also lie to the west. Located 10 miles (16 km) northwest of Ullapool, Achiltibuie is home to the Hydroponicum, a garden where plants are grown using a hydroponic system, in water and without soil. It is the last stop on the road to Achduart.

==History==
The first post office in the village opened on 28 July 1884. Mackay, James A. (1989) Scottish Post Offices, p. 28, Dumfries: published by the author, ISBN 0-906440-48-3 

==The Eagle Of The Ninth==
The Roman epic The Eagle, based on the 1954 novel The Eagle of the Ninth by Rosemary Sutcliff, was filmed on location in Achiltibuie for a week in October 2009. The main location was Fox Point, Old Dornie. The Pictish village which was constructed at Fox Point was used on most days of the filming. Other sites included Achnahaird beach where a horse chase was filmed and Loch Lurgainn.

==Notable residents==
*Tom Longstaff (1875-1964), mountaineer.
*Lucy Irvine (b. 1956), writer, lived at the Achiltibuie Hotel with her parents, who owned it and the Hydroponicum.
*Reiner Luyken (b. 1951), German journalist ("Die ZEIT"), lives in Achiltibuie

==References==

==External links==
* Achiltibuie Tourist Association
* Coigach Genealogy
* 



[[Adaptive expectations]]

In economics, adaptive expectations means that people form their expectations about what will happen in the future based on what has happened in the past. For example, if inflation has been higher than expected in the past, people would revise expectations for the future.

One simple version of adaptive expectations is stated in the following equation, where is the next year's rate of inflation that is currently expected; is this year's rate of inflation that was expected last year; and is this year's actual rate of inflation:

::

where is between 0 and 1. This says that current expectations of future inflation reflect past expectations and an "error-adjustment" term, in which current expectations are raised (or lowered) according to the gap between actual inflation and previous expectations. This error-adjustment is also called "partial adjustment."

The theory of adaptive expectations can be applied to all previous periods so that current inflationary expectations equal:

::

where equals actual inflation years in the past. Thus, current expected inflation reflects a weighted average of all past inflation, where the weights get smaller and smaller as we move further in the past.

Once a forecasting error is made by agents, due to a stochastic shock, they will be unable to correctly forecast the price level again even if the price level experiences no further shocks since they only ever incorporate part of their errors. The backward nature of expectation formulation and the resultant systematic errors made by agents (see Cobweb model) was unsatisfactory to economists such as John Muth, who was pivotal in the development of an alternative model of how expectations are formed, called rational expectations. This has largely replaced adaptive expectations in macroeconomic theory since its assumption of optimality of expectations is consistent with economic theory.

==References==
*George W. Evans and Seppo Honkapohja (2001), Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics. Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-04921-2.

==See also==
*Rational Expectations
*Policy Ineffectiveness Proposition
*Self-fulfilling prophecy
*Problem of induction



[[Mexican tetra]]

The Mexican tetra or Blind Cave Fish (Astyanax mexicanus) is a freshwater fish
of the characin family (family Characidae) of
order Characiformes. 
 
The type species of its genus, it is native to the Nearctic ecozone, originating in the lower Rio Grande and the Neueces and Pecos Rivers in Texas as well as the central and eastern parts of Mexico.

Growing to a maximum overall length of 12 cm (4.7 in), the Mexican tetra is of typical characin shape, with unremarkable, drab coloration. Its blind cave form, however, is notable for having no eyes and being albino, that is, completely devoid of pigmentation; it has a pinkish-white color to its body.

This fish, especially the blind variant, is reasonably popular among .

A. mexicanus is a peaceful species that spends most of its time in the mid-level of the water above the rocky and sandy bottoms of pools and backwaters of creeks and rivers of its native environment. Coming from a subtropical climate, it prefers water with 6.0&ndash;7.8 pH, a hardness of up to 30 dGH, and a temperature range of 20 to 25 °C (68 to 77 °F). In the winter it migrates to warmer waters. Its natural diet consists of crustaceans, insects, and annelids, although in captivity it is omnivorous.

The Mexican tetra has been treated as a subspecies of A. fasciatus, the banded tetra, but this is not widely accepted. 

==Blind cave form==

Mexican Tetra in Blind Cave Fish form
A. mexicanus is famous for its blind cave form, which is known by such names as blind cave tetra, blind tetra, and blind cavefish. Some thirty distinct populations of Mexican tetras live in deep caves and have lost the power of sight and even their eyes. These fish can still, however, find their way around by means of their lateral lines, which are highly sensitive to fluctuating water pressure.

The eyed and eyeless forms of A. mexicanus, being members of the same species, are closely related and can interbreed. Astyanax jordani, however, is another blind cave fish, independently and recently evolved from the sighted surface form, which is sometimes confused with the cave form of A. mexicanus. However, when born, the cave dwelling form of A. mexicanus has eyes. As they grow older, skin just grows over them and the eyes degenerate completely, because there is no need for sight in the pitch-black world of a cave. 

===In the aquarium===

A. mexicanus only grows to a length of 12 cm (4.7 in) in the recommended minimum of 30 US gallons. The blind cave tetra is a fairly hardy species. They are not picky on food, as they will eat anything from standard flakes to sinking carnivore pellets. Their lack of sight does not hinder their ability to get any and all food before it hits the bottom.
They prefer subdued lighting with a rocky substrate, like gravel. It is recommended that the tank mimic their natural environment, so artificial or natural rock is highly appreciated. They become semi-aggressive as they age, but are by nature schooling fish, and a group of at least three is a good idea. However, it isn't imperative, as they can be kept as a single specimen. As stated earlier, they can get to their food rather swiftly, even more so than fish with the ability to see, so they aren't really good for a community, but one is OK for a semi-aggressive community. They are also incredibly fast, so catching them with the net is a chore in itself while conducting maintenance.

===Evolution research===

The surface and cave forms of the Mexican tetra have proven popular subjects for scientists studying evolution.

A recent study suggests that there are at least two distinct genetic lineages among the blind populations, arguing that these represent a case of convergent evolution. 

One theory to the cave fish's evolution says that because of its dark habitat, the fish embryo saves energy it would normally use to develop eyes to develop other body parts, and this developmental choice would eventually dominate the population. This is called economical adaptation.
However, studies have shown that blind cave fish embryos begin to grow eyes during development but then something actively stops this process and flesh grows over the partially grown eyes.
Another theory is that some Mexican tetra randomly don't develop eyes (which is represented by broken genes in the fish's genome), and this lack of eyes spreads to the rest of the population despite having no advantage or disadvantage. This is called the neutral theory.

In one experiment studying eye development, University of Maryland scientists transplanted lenses from the eyes of sighted surface-form embryos into blind cave-form embryos, and vice versa. In the cave form, lens development begins within the first 24 hours of embryonic development, but quickly aborts, the lens cells dying; most of the rest of the eye structures never develop. Researchers found that the lens seemed to control the development of the rest of the eye, as the surface-form tetras which received cave-form lenses failed to develop eyes, while cave-form tetras which received surface-form lenses grew eyes with pupils, corneas, and irises. (It is not clear whether they possessed sight, however.) 
 

===Blind cave tetras and creationism===

The blind form of the Mexican tetra is different from the surface-dwelling form in a number of ways, including having unpigmented skin, having a better olfactory sense by having taste buds all over its head, and by being able to store four times more energy as fat allowing it to deal with irregular food supplies more effectively. Helfman G., Collette B., & Facey D.: The Diversity of Fishes, Blackwell Publishing, p 315, 1997, ISBN 0-86542-256-7 However, it is the lack of eyes that has been at the centre of discussion of the Mexican cave tetras among creationists.

Darwin said of sightless fish - 

Modern genetics has made clear that the lack of use does not, in itself, necessitate a feature's disappearance. In this context, the positive genetic benefits have to be considered, i.e., what advantages are obtained by cave-dwelling tetras by losing their eyes? Possible explanations include:
*not developing eyes allows the individual more energy for growth and reproduction 
*there remains less chance of accidental damage and infection, since the previously useless and exposed organ is sealed with a flap of protective skin

Another likely explanation for the loss of its eyes is that of selective neutrality and genetic drift: in the dark environment of the cave, the eyes are neither advantageous nor disadvantageous and thus any genetic factors that might impair the eyes (or their development) can take hold with no consequence on the individual or species. Because there is no selection pressure for sight in this environment, any number of genetic abnormalities that give rise to the damage or loss of eyes could proliferate among the population with no effect on the fitness of the population.

Among some creationists the cave tetra is seen as evidence against evolution. One argument claims that this is an instance of "devolution" -- showing an evolutionary trend of decreasing complexity. But evolution is a non-directional process, and while increased complexity is a common effect, there is no reason why evolution cannot tend towards simplicity if that makes an organism better suited to its environment. Dawkins, R.: Climbing Mount Improbable, W. W. Norton & Co, 1997, ISBN 0393316823 

==See also==
*List of freshwater aquarium fish species

== References ==
 



[[Atom probe]]

Visualisation of data obtained from an atom probe, each point represents a reconstructed atom position from detected evaporated ions.

The atom probe is a microscope used in material science that was invented in 1967 by Erwin Wilhelm Müller, J. A. Panitz, and S. Brooks McLane. The atom probe is closely related to the method of Field Ion Microscopy, which is the first microscopic method to achieve atomic resolution, occurring in 1951. 

Atom probes are unlike conventional optical or electron microscopes, in that the magnification effect comes from the magnification provided by a highly curved electric field, rather than by the manipulation of radiation paths. Technically, the method is destructive in nature removing ions from a sample surface in order to image and identify them, generating magnifications sufficient to observe individual atoms as they are removed from the sample surface. Through coupling of this magnification method with time of flight mass spectrometry, ions evaporated by application of electric pulses can have their mass-to-charge ratio computed. 

Through successive evaporation of material, layers of atoms are removed from a specimen, allowing for probing not only of the surface, but also through the material itself. Computer methods are utilised to rebuild a three dimensional view of the sample, prior to it being evaporated, providing atomic scale information on the structure of a sample, as well as providing the type atomic species information. The instrument allows the three-dimensional reconstruction of up to hundreds of millions of atoms from a sharp tip (corresponding to specimen volumes of 10,000-1,000,000 nm3).

== Overview ==
Atom probe samples are shaped to implicitly provide a highly curved electric potential to induce the resultant magnification, as opposed to direct use of lensing, such as via magnetic lenses. Furthermore, in normal operation (as opposed to a field ionization modes) the atom probe does not utilize a secondary source to probe the sample. Rather, the sample is evaporated in a controlled manner (field evaporation) and the evaporated ions are impacted onto a detector, which may be up to several meters from the specimen.

The samples used in atom probe are usually a metallic or semi-conducting material, with the needle geometry produced by electropolishing, or focused ion beam methods. Preparation is done, often by hand, to manufacture a tip radius sufficient to induce a high electric field, with radii on the order of 100 nm.

To conduct an atom probe experiment, such a needle is placed in an ultra high vacuum chamber. After introduction into the vacuum system, the sample is reduced to cryogenic temperatures (typically 20-100 K) and manipulated such that the needle's point is aimed towards an ion detector. A pulsed high voltage source (typically 1-2 kV) is generated and applied to the specimen, with pulse repetition rates in the hundreds of kilohertz range. The application of the pulsed voltage to the sample allows for individual ions at the sample surface to have their electric field, and hence atomic bonding, temporarily disrupted. This results in ejection of an ionised atom from the sample surface at a known time. The delay between application of the pulse and detection of the ion allows for the computation of a mass-to-charge ratio.

Whilst the uncertainty in the atomic mass computed by time-of-flight methods in atom probe is sufficiently small to allow for detection of individual isotopes within a material this uncertainty may still, in some cases, confound definitive identification of atomic species. Effects such as superposition of differing ions with multiple electrons removed, or through the presence of complex species formation during evaporation may cause two or more species to have sufficiently close time-of-flights to make definitive identification impossible.

== History ==
=== Field Ion Microscopy ===

Field ion microscopy techniques were initially construed as a modification of field emission, a technique which allows for a stream of electrons to be emitted from a sharp needle when subjected to a sufficiently high electric field (~3-6 V/nm). The needle is oriented towards a phosphor screen to create a projected image of the tip's work function, near the specimen surface. Whilst providing a projected image, the technique has limited resolution (2-2.5 nm), due to both quantum mechanical effects and lateral variation in electron velocity. 

In field ion and atom probe methods, the polarity of the electric field is reversed, with a high positive field applied to the sample. For field ion microscopy a gas is introduced, known as the imaging gas, into the chamber at very low pressures. By application of a voltage during the presence of this gas, gas ions in the vicinity of the tip undergo ionisation, with greater numbers of ions generated immediately above atoms occupying edge or planar sites.

==Imaging atom probe (IAP)==
The imaging atom probe (IAP), invented in 1974 by J. A. Panitz, decreased the need to move the tip. In the IAP, ions emitted from the surface are recorded and mass analyzed at a detector placed within 12 cm of the tip (to provide a reasonably large field of view). By "time-gating" the detector for the arrival of a particular species of interest its crystallographic distribution on the surface, and as a function of depth, can be determined. Without time-gating all of the species reaching the detector are analyzed. 

===Atom-probe tomography (APT)===
Atom-probe tomography (APT) uses a position-sensitive detector to deduce the lateral location of atoms. This allows 3-D reconstructions to be generated. The idea of the APT, inspired by J. A. Panitz's patent, was developed by Mike Miller starting in 1983 and culminated with the first prototype in 1986. Various refinements were made to the instrument, including the use of a so-called position-sensitive (PoS) detector by Alfred Cerezo, Terence Godfrey, and George D. W. Smith at Oxford University in 1988. The Tomographic Atom Probe (TAP), developed by researchers at the University of Rouen in France in 1993, introduced a multichannel timing system and multianode array. Both instruments (PoSAP and TAP) were commercialized by Oxford Nanoscience and Cameca respectively. Since then, there have been many refinements to increase the field of view, mass and position resolution, and data acquisition rate of the instrument. In 2005, the commercialization of the pulsed laser atom probe (PLAP) expanded the avenues of research from highly conductive materials (metals) to poor conductors (semiconductors like silicon) and even insulating materials. AMETEK acquired Cameca in 2007 and Imago Scientific Instruments (Madison, WI) in 2010, making the company the sole commercial developer of APTs.

Teeth of the radula of chiton Chaetopleura apiculata has been studied by atom-probe tomography for the chemical structure and it have been published in 2011. Gordon L. M. & Joester D. (2011). "Nanoscale chemical tomography of buried organic–inorganic interfaces in the chiton tooth". (journal)|] 469: 194-197. . It has been shown, that teeth contain fibres with surrounded by magnetite and some of them also with sodium or magnesium. It has been probably for the first time of using atom-probe tomography for the study of radula and in biominerals. This method can be used for example for further study of enamel and dentin of human teeth and bones. 

== Theory ==
=== Field evaporation ===
Field evaporation is an effect that can occur when an atom bonded at the surface of a material is in the presence of a sufficiently high and appropriately directed electric field, where the electric field is the differential of electric potential (voltage) with respect to distance. Once this condition is met, it is sufficient that local bonding at the specimen surface is capable of being overcome by the field, allowing for evaporation of an atom from the surface to which it is otherwise bonded.

=== Field ionisation ===

=== Ion flight ===

Whether evaporated from the material itself, or ionised from the gas, the ions that are evaporated are accelerated by electrostatic force, acquiring most of their energy within a few tip-radii of the sample.

Subsequently, the accelerative force on any given ion is controlled by the electrostatic equation, where n is the ionisation state of the ion, and e is the fundamental electric charge.

This can be equated with the mass of the ion, m, via Newton's law (F=ma):

Relativistic effects in the ion flight are usually ignored, as realisable ion speeds are only a very small fraction of the speed of light.

Assuming that the ion is accelerated during a very short interval, the ion can be assumed to be travelling at constant velocity. As the ion will travel from the tip at voltage V1 to some nominal ground potential, the speed at which the ion is travelling can be estimated by the energy transferred into the ion during (or near) ionisation. Therefore the ion speed can be computed with the following equation, which relates kinetic energy to energy gain due to the electric field.

:

Where U is the ion velocity. Solving for U, the following relation is found:

:

For a singly charged hydrogen ion, ionised at 8 kV, the resulting velocity would be X ms−1. For a singly charged deuterium ion, the velocity would be Y ms−1. If a detector was placed at a distance of 1 m, the ion flight times would be X and Y ns. Thus, the time of the ion arrival can be used to infer the ion type itself, if the evaporation time is known.

From the above equation, it can be re-arranged to show that

:

given a known flight distance. F, for the ion, and a known flight time, t,

:

and thus one can substitute these values to obtain the mass-to-charge for the ion.

:

Thus for an ion which traverses a 1 m flight path, across a time of 2000 ns, given an initial accelerating voltage of 5000 V and noting that one amu is 1×10−27 kg, the mass-to-charge ratio (more correctly the mass-to-ionisation value ratio) becomes Z amu/charge.

=== Magnification ===
The magnification in an atom is due to the projection of ions radially away from the small, sharp tip. Subsequently, in the far field, the ions will be greatly magnified. This magnification is sufficient to observe field variations due to individual atoms, thus allowing in field ion and field evaporation modes for the imaging of single atoms.

The standard projection model for the atom probe is an emitter geometry that is based upon a revolution of a conic section, such as a sphere, hyperboloid or paraboloid. For these tip models, solutions to the field may be approximated or obtained analytically. The magnification for a spherical emitter is inversely proportional to the radius of the tip, given a projection directly onto a spherical screen, the following equation can be obtained geometrically.

:

Where rscreen is the radius of the detection screen from the tip centre, and rtip the tip radius. Practical tip to screen distances may range from several centimeters to several meters, with increased detector area required at larger to subtend the same field of view.

Practically speaking, the usable magnification will be limited by several effects, such as lateral vibration of the atoms prior to evaporation.

Whilst the magnification of both the field ion and atom probe microscopes is extremely high, the exact magnification is dependant upon conditions specific to the examined specimen, so unlike for conventional electron microscopes, there is often little direct control on magnification, and furthermore, obtained images may have strongly variable magnifications due to fluctuations in the shape of the electric field at the surface.

=== Reconstruction ===
The computational conversion of the ion sequence data, as obtained from a position sensitive detector, to a three dimensional visualisation of atomic types, is termed "reconstruction". Reconstruction algorithms are typically geometrically based, and have several literature formulations. Most models for reconstruction assume that the tip is a spherical object, and utilise empirical corrections to stereographic projection to convert detector positions back to a 2D surface embedded in R3. By sweeping this surface through R3 as a function of the ion sequence input data, such as via ion-ordering, a volume is generated onto which positions the 2D detector positions can be computed and placed three-dimensional space.

Typically the sweep takes the simple form of an advancement of the surface, such that the surface is expanded in a symmetric manner about its advancement axis, with the advancement rate set by some nominal volume attributed to each event, representative of the atomic volume of the atom prior to evaporation. This causes the final reconstructed volume to assume a rounded-conical shape, similar to a badminton shuttlecock for . The detected events thus become a point cloud data with attributed experimentally measured values, such as ion time of flight or experimentally derived quantities, e.g. time of flight or detector data.

This form of data manipulation allows for rapid computer visualisation and analysis, with data presented as point cloud data with additional information, such as each ion's mass to charge (as computed from the velocity equation above), voltage or other auxiliary measured quantity or computation therefrom.

=== Data features ===

The canonical feature of atom probe data its high spatial resolution in the direction through the material, which has been attributed to an ordered evaporation sequence. This data can therefore image near atomically sharp interfaces with the associated chemical information.

The data obtained from the evaporative process is however not without artefacts that form the physical evaporation or ionisation process. A key feature of the evaporation or field ion images is that the data density is highly inhomogeneous, due to the corrugation of the specimen surface at the atomic scale. This corrugation gives rise to strong electric field gradients in the near-tip zone (on the order of an atomic radii or less from the tip), which during ionisation deflects ions away from the electric field normal.

The resultant deflection means that in these regions of high curvature, atomic terraces are belied by a strong anisotropy in the detection density. Where this occurs due to a few atoms on a surface is usually referred to as a "pole", as these are coincident with the crystallographic axes of the specimen (FCC, BCC, HCP) etc. Where the edges of an atomic terrace causes deflection, a low density line is formed and is termed a "zone line".

These poles and zone-lines, whilst inducing fluctuations in data density in the reconstructed datasets, which can prove problematic during post-analysis, are critical for determining information such as angular magnification, as the crystallographic relationships between features are typically well known.

When reconstructing the data, owing to the evaporation of successive layers of material from the sample, the lateral and in-depth reconstruction values are highly anisotropic. Determination of the exact resolution of the instrument is of limited use, as the resolution of the device is set by the physical properties of the material under analysis.

== Systems ==
Atom probe devices have only relatively recently been produced commercially, and many designs have been constructed since the method's inception. Initial field ion microscopes, precursors to modern atom probes, were usually glass blown devices developed by individual research laboratories.

=== System layout ===
At a minimum, an atom probe will consist of several key pieces of equipment.

* A vacuum system for maintaining the low pressures (~10−8 to 10−10 Pa) required.
* A system for manipulation of samples inside the vacuum, including sample viewing systems. Samples may be required to be cooled anywhere between room temperature to as low as 15 K.
* A cooling system to reduce atomic motion, such as a helium refrigeration circuit.
* A high voltage system to raise the sample voltage.
* A detection system for single ions for field evaporation.

Optionally, an atom probe may also include laser-optical systems for laser beam preparation, targeting and pulsing, if using laser-evaporation methods. Staged vacuum systems are regularly employed to ensure that the system vacuum conditions remain stable. In-situ reaction systems may also be employed for some studies.

=== Performance ===

Collectable ion volumes were previously limited to several thousand, or tens of thousands of ionic events. Subsequent electronics and instrumentation devleopment has increased the rate of data accumulation, with datasets of several tens of miillion atoms (dataset volumes of 105 nm3)

== Applications ==
=== Metallurgy ===
Atom probe has typically been employed in the chemical analysis of alloy systems at the atomic level. This has arisen as a result of voltage pulsed atom probes providing good chemical and sufficient spatial information in these materials. Metal samples from large grained alloys may be simple to fabricate, particularly from wire samples, with hand-electropolishing techniques giving good results.

Subsequently, atom probe has been used in the analysis of the chemical composition of a wide range of alloys.

Such data is critical in determining the effeto of alloy constituents in a bulk material, identification of solid-state reaction features, such as solid phase precipitates. Such information may not be amenable to analysis by other means (e.g. TEM) owing to the difficulty in generating a three dimensional dataset with composition.

=== Semiconductors ===
Semi-conductor materials are often analysable in atom probe, however sample preparation may be more difficult, and interpretation of results may be more complex, particularly if the semi-conductor contains phases which evaporate at differing electric field strengths.

Applications such as ion implantation may be used to identify the distribution of dopants inside a semi-conducting material, which is increasingly critical in the correct design of modern nanometre scale electronics.

== Limitations ==

* Materials implicitly control achievable, spatial resolution
* Specimen geometry is uncontrolled, yet controls projection behaviour, hence little control over the magnification. This may induce strong distortions into the computer generated 3D model dataset.
* Limited volume selectability, unlike EM methods. Site specific preparation methods, e.g. using Focussed ion beam preparation, although more time consuming, may be used to bypass such limitations.
* Features of interest may evaporate in a physically different manner to the bulk sample, altering projection geometry and the magnification of the reconstructed volume.
* Ion overlap in some samples (e.g. between oxygen and ) may result in ambiguous analysed species. This may be mitigated by selection of experiment temperature or laser input energy to influence the ionisation number (+, ++, 3+ etc.) of the ionised groups.
* Low molecular weight gases (Hydrogen & helium) may be difficult to remove from the analysis chamber, and may be adsorbed and emitted from the specimen, even though not present in the original specimen. This may also limit identification of Hydrogen in some samples. However deuterated samples have been used to overcome this limitation.
* Results may be contingent on the parameters used to convert the 2D detected data into 3D. Subsequently spatial measurements can be greatly affected, and careful analysis of the reconstructed volume is needd to ensure the correct results. In more problematic materials, correct reconstruction may be impossible due to limited knowledge of the true magnification; particularly if zone or pole regions cannot be observed.

== References ==
 

==External links==

* Video demonstrating Field Ion images, and pulsed ion evaporation

===Research groups and facilities===
====Americas====
* Iowa State University
* Northwestern University Center for Atom-Probe Tomography
* Sandia National Laboratories
* The University of Alabama's Central Analytical Facility
* University of North Texas's Center for Advanced Research and Technology
* DOE's Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory

====Asia====
* Metallic Nanostructure group of the National Institute for Materials Science (Japan)

====Australia====
* Australian Centre for Microscopy & Microanalysis, The University of Sydney

====Europe====
* Groupe de Physique des Matériaux (FRANCE)
* Atom Probe Tomography Group, Göttingen University (Germany)
* Division of Microscopy and Microanalysis, Chalmers University of Technology (Sweden)
* Field Ion Microscopy Group University of Oxford (United Kingdom)

===Instrument Manufacturers===
* Cameca



[[Al Capone]]

Alphonse Gabriel "Al" Capone (January 17, 1899 – January 25, 1947) was an American gangster who led a Prohibition-era crime syndicate. The Chicago Outfit, which subsequently became known as the "Capones", was dedicated to smuggling and bootlegging liquor, and other illegal activities such as prostitution, in Chicago from the early 1920s to 1931.

Born in the borough of Brooklyn in New York City to Italian immigrants, Capone became involved with gang activity at a young age after being expelled from school at age 14. In his early twenties, he moved to Chicago to take advantage of a new opportunity to make money smuggling illegal alcoholic beverages into the city during Prohibition. He also engaged in various other criminal activities, including bribery of government figures and prostitution. Despite his illegitimate occupation, Capone became a highly visible public figure. He made various charitable endeavors using the money he made from his activities, and was viewed by many to be a "modern-day Robin Hood". 

Capone was publicly criticized for his supposed involvement in the Saint Valentine's Day Massacre, when seven rival gang members were executed. Capone was convicted on federal charges of tax evasion, and sentenced to federal prison. His incarceration included a term at the then-new Alcatraz federal prison. In the final years of Capone's life, he suffered mental and physical deterioration due to late-stage neurosyphilis, which he had contracted as a youth. On January 25, 1947, he died from cardiac arrest after suffering a stroke.

==Early life==
Capone's mother, Teresina
Alphonse Gabriel Capone was born in the borough of Brooklyn in New York on January 17, 1899. His parents, Gabriele (December 12, 1864 – November 14, 1920) and Teresina Capone (December 28, 1867 – November 29, 1952), were immigrants from Italy. His father, Gabriele, was a barber from Castellammare di Stabia, a town about south of Naples, and his mother, Teresina, was a seamstress and the daughter of Angelo Raiola from Angri, a town in the province of Salerno. 

Gabriele and Teresina had nine children: Alphonse "Scarface Al" Capone, James Capone (also known as Richard Two-Gun Hart), Raffaele Capone (also known as Ralph "Bottles" Capone, who took charge of his brother's beverage industry), Salvatore "Frank" Capone, John Capone, Albert Capone, Matthew Capone, Rose Capone, and Mafalda Capone (who married John J. Maritote). The Capone family immigrated to the United States in 1893 and settled at 95 Navy Street, in the Navy Yard section of downtown Brooklyn. Gabriele Capone worked at a nearby barber shop at 29 Park Avenue. When Al was 11, the Capone family moved to 38 Garfield Place in Park Slope, Brooklyn.

Capone showed promise as a student, but had trouble with the rules at his strict parochial Catholic school. He dropped out of school at the age of 14, after being expelled for hitting a female teacher in the face. He worked at odd jobs around Brooklyn, including a candy store and a bowling alley. Kobler, 27. During this time, Capone was influenced by gangster Johnny Torrio, whom he came to regard as a mentor. Kobler, 26. 

==Career==
After his initial stint with small-time gangs that included the Junior Forty Thieves and the Bowery Boys, Capone joined the Brooklyn Rippers and then the powerful Five Points Gang based in Lower Manhattan. During this time, he was employed and mentored by fellow racketeer Frankie Yale, a bartender in a Coney Island dance hall and saloon called the Harvard Inn. Capone received the scars that gave him the nickname "Scarface" in a fight. After he inadvertently insulted a woman while working the door at a Brooklyn night club, Capone was attacked by her brother Frank Gallucio; his face was slashed three times on the left side. Yale insisted that Capone apologize to Gallucio, and later Capone hired him as a bodyguard. Kobler, 36. When photographed, Capone hid the scarred left side of his face. He said the injuries were war wounds. Kobler, 15. Capone was called "Snorky" by his closest friends. "Mobsters and Gangsters from Al Capone to Tony Soprano", Life (2002). 

===Marriage and family===
On December 30, 1918, Capone married Mae Josephine Coughlin, who was Irish Catholic and who, earlier that month, had given birth to their first son, Albert Francis ("Sonny") Capone. As Capone was under the age of 21, his parents had to consent to the marriage in writing.

===Chicago career===
Capone departed New York for Chicago without his new wife and son, who joined him later. In 1923, he purchased a small house at 7244 South Prairie Avenue in the Park Manor neighborhood on the city's south side for USD $5,500. 

Capone was recruited for Chicago by Johnny Torrio, his Five Points Gang mentor. Torrio had gone there to resolve some family problems his cousin's husband was having with the Black Hand. Torrio killed the members of the Black Hand who had given his cousin's husband problems. He saw many business opportunities in Chicago, especially bootlegging following the onset of prohibition. Chicago's location on Lake Michigan gave access to a vast inland territory, and it was well-served by railroads. Torrio took over the crime empire of James "Big Jim" Colosimo after he was murdered. Yale was a suspect but legal proceedings against him were dropped due to a lack of evidence. Capone was suspected in the murders of Colosimo and two other men. He was seeking a safe haven and a better job to provide for his new family. Kobler, 37. 

The 1924 town council elections in Cicero became known as one of the most crooked elections in the Chicago area's long history, with voters threatened by thugs at polling stations. Capone's mayoral candidate won by a huge margin and weeks later announced that he would run Capone out of town. Capone met with his puppet-mayor and knocked him down the town hall steps.

For Capone, the election victory was marred by the death of his younger brother Frank at the hands of the police. Capone cried at his brother's funeral and ordered the closure of all the speakeasies in Cicero for a day as a mark of respect.

Much of Capone's family settled in Cicero as well. In 1930, Capone's sister Mafalda married John J. Maritote at St. Mary of Czestochowa, a massive Neogothic edifice towering over Cicero Avenue in the Polish Cathedral style. 

===Capone's power grows in Cicero===
The Torrio-Capone organization, as well as the Sicilian-American Genna crime family, competed with the North Side Gang of Dean O'Banion. In May 1924, O'Banion discovered that their Sieben Brewery was going to be raided by federal agents and sold his share to Torrio. After the raid, both O'Banion and Torrio were arrested. Torrio's people murdered O'Banion in revenge on October 10, 1924, provoking a gang war. Bergreen, pp 134-135 Bergreen, p 138 

In 1925, Torrio was severely injured in an attack by the North Side Gang; he turned over his business to Capone and returned to Italy. During the Prohibition Era, Capone controlled large portions of the Chicago underworld, which provided The Outfit with an estimated US $100 million per year in revenue. "Purchasing Power of Money in the United States from 1774 to 2008." Online calculator appears on the right side of website. http://www.measuringworth.com/ppowerus/index.php This wealth was generated through numerous illegal vice enterprises, such as gambling and prostitution; the highest revenue was generated by the sale of liquor. 

His transportation network moved smuggled liquor from the rum-runners of the East Coast, The Purple Gang in Detroit, who brought liquor in from Canada, and local production which came from Midwestern moonshine operations and illegal breweries. With the revenues gained by his bootlegging operation, Capone increased his grip on the political and law-enforcement establishments in Chicago. He made his headquarters at Chicago's Lexington Hotel; after the St. Valentine's Day Massacre, it was nicknamed "Capone's Castle".

According to one source, while Al Capone was in charge of the Chicago Outfit it has been reported that some members of organization would take the train from Chicago to Wabash County, Illinois and stay at a remote hotel called the Grand Rapids Hotel on the Wabash River next to the Grand Rapids Dam. The hotel was only in existence for nine years but many residents of the area remember seeing men who claimed to be from the Chicago Outfit at the Grand Rapids Hotel. Suspiciously, the Grand Rapids Hotel was burned down by a man with one leg who dropped a blowtorch. It is not currently known if the men who travelled to the Grand Rapids Hotel were smuggling liquor in violation of prohibition or merely vacationing. Nolan, John Matthew "2,543 Days: A history of the Hotel at the Grand Rapids Dam on the Wabash River" 

The organized corruption included the bribing of Chicago Mayor William "Big Bill" Hale Thompson, and Capone's gang operated largely free from legal intrusion. He operated casinos and speakeasies throughout the city. With his wealth, he indulged in custom suits, cigars, gourmet food and drink (his preferred liquor was Templeton Rye from Iowa ), jewelry, and female companionship. He garnered media attention, to which his favorite responses were "I am just a businessman, giving the people what they want," and "All I do is satisfy a public demand." Capone had become a celebrity.

His rivals retaliated for the violence of Capone's enforcement of control. North Side gangsters Hymie Weiss and Bugs Moran wanted to bring him down. More than once, Capone's car was riddled with bullets. On September 20, 1926, the North Side gang shot into Capone's entourage as he was eating lunch in the Hawthorne Hotel restaurant. A motorcade of ten vehicles, using Thompson submachine guns and shotguns riddled the outside of the Hotel and the restaurant on the first floor of the building. Capone's bodyguard, Frankie Rio, threw him to the ground at the first sound of gunfire. Several bystanders were hurt from flying glass and bullet fragments in the raid. Capone paid for the medical care of a young boy and his mother who would have lost her eyesight otherwise. This event prompted Capone to call for a truce, but negotiations fell through. The attacks were believed to have been made at Moran's direction and left Capone shaken.

Capone had his Cadillac fitted with bullet-proof glass, run-flat tires and a police siren. In 1932, Treasury agents working on prohibition issues seized the car; it was later used as President Franklin D. Roosevelt's limousine. 

Capone placed armed bodyguards around the clock at his headquarters at the Lexington Hotel, at 22nd Street (later renamed Cermak Road) and Michigan Avenue. For his trips away from Chicago, Capone was reputed to have had several other retreats and hideouts located in:

| style="width:50%; vertical-align:top; text-align:left; border:0;"|
* Brookfield, Wisconsin
* Saint Paul, Minnesota
* French Lick, Indiana
* Lansing, Michigan
* Jacksonville, Florida
* Hot Springs, Arkansas
| style="width:50%; vertical-align:top; text-align:left; border:0;"|
* Johnson City, Tennessee
* Olean, New York
* Fontana, California
* Terre Haute, Indiana
* Grand Haven, Michigan
* Dubuque, Iowa

Former New York gang member Owney "The Killer" Madden retired to Hot Springs and invited his former colleagues to visit him there; this was also the place that Lucky Luciano was first arrested. As a further precaution, Capone and his entourage would often show up suddenly at one of Chicago's train depots and buy up an entire Pullman sleeper car on night trains to places such as Cleveland, Omaha, Kansas City, Little Rock or Hot Springs, where they would spend a week in luxury hotel suites under assumed names. In 1928, Capone bought a 14-room retreat on Palm Island, Florida close to Miami Beach. 

===Saint Valentine's Day Massacre===

The St. Valentine's Day Massacre eliminated some of Capone's enemies, but outraged the general public

It is believed that Capone ordered the 1929 Saint Valentine's Day Massacre in the Lincoln Park neighborhood on Chicago's North Side. Details of the killing of the seven victims in a garage at 2122 North Clark Street (then the SMC Cartage Co.) and the extent of Capone's involvement are widely disputed. No one was ever brought to trial for the crime. The massacre was thought to be the Outfit's effort to strike back at Bugs Moran's North Side gang. They had been increasingly bold in hijacking the Outfit's booze trucks, assassinating two presidents of the Outfit-controlled Unione Siciliana, and made three assassination attempts on Jack McGurn, a top enforcer of Capone. 

To monitor their targets' habits and movements, Capone’s men rented an apartment across from the trucking warehouse that served as a Moran headquarters. On the morning of Thursday February 14, 1929, Capone’s lookouts signaled gunmen disguised as police to start a 'raid'. The faux police lined the seven victims along a wall without a struggle then signaled for accomplices with machine guns. The seven victims were machine-gunned and shot-gunned. Photos of the massacre victims shocked the public and damaged Capone's reputation. Federal law enforcement worked to investigate his activities. 

===Conviction and imprisonment===

Al Capone's cell at the Eastern State Penitentiary, Philadelphia, PA

In 1929, the Bureau of Prohibition agent Eliot Ness began an investigation of Capone and his business, attempting to get a conviction for Prohibition violations. Frank J. Wilson investigated Capone's income tax violations, which the government decided was more likely material for a conviction. In 1931 Capone was indicted for income tax evasion and various violations of the Volstead Act (Prohibition). His attorneys made a plea deal, but the presiding judge warned he might not follow the sentencing recommendation from the prosecution. Capone withdrew his plea of guilty.

His attempt to bribe and intimidate the potential jurors was discovered by Ness's men, The Untouchables . The venire (jury pool) was switched with one from another case, and Capone was stymied. Following a long trial, on October 17 the jury returned a mixed verdict, finding Capone guilty of five counts of tax evasion and failing to file tax returns Bergreen, p. 484 (the Volstead Act violations were dropped). The judge sentenced him to 11 years imprisonment, at the time the longest tax evasion sentence ever given, along with heavy fines, and liens were filed against his various properties. Bergreen, pp. 486-487 His appeals of both the conviction and the sentence were denied. Capone v. United States, 56 F.2d 927 (1931), cert. denied, 286 U.S. 553, 76 L.Ed. 1288, 52 S.Ct. 503; (1932); United States v. Capone, 93 F.2d 840 (1937), cert. denied, 303 U.S. 651, 82 L.Ed. 1112, 58 S.Ct. 750 (1938). 

In May 1932, Capone was sent to Atlanta U.S. Penitentiary, but he was able to obtain special privileges. Later, for a short period of time, he was transferred to the Lincoln Heights Jail. He was transferred to Alcatraz on August 11, 1934, which was newly established as a prison on an island off San Francisco. The warden kept tight security and cut off Capone's contact with colleagues. His isolation and the repeal of Prohibition in December 1933, which reduced a major source of revenue, diminished his power.
Al Capone at Alcatraz

Capone had some problems at Alcatraz. While working in the prison basement, he got into an argument with an inmate who was standing in line waiting for a haircut; this person then stabbed him with a pair of shears. Capone was admitted into the prison hospital with a minor wound and released a few days later. In addition, his health declined as the syphilis which he had contracted as a youth progressed. He spent the last year of his sentence in the prison hospital, confused and disoriented. Al Capone: Chicago's Most Infamous Mob Boss - The Crime library. Capone completed his term in Alcatraz on January 6, 1939, and was transferred to the Federal Correctional Institution at Terminal Island in California, to serve the one-year contempt of court term he was originally sentenced to serve in Chicago's Cook County jail. J. Campbell Bruce, "Escape from Alcatraz", Random House Digital, Inc. (2005), p 32. He was paroled on November 16, 1939, and, after having spent a short time in a hospital, returned to his home in Palm Island, Florida. John J. Binder, "The Chicago Outfit", Arcadia Publishing (2003), p 41-42. 

===Later years===
Capone's control and interests within organized crime diminished rapidly after his imprisonment, and he was no longer able to run the Outfit after his release. He had lost weight, and his physical and mental health had deteriorated under the effects of neurosyphilis. He had become incapable of resuming his gang activity. In 1946, his physician and a Baltimore psychiatrist performed examinations and concluded that Capone then had the mental capability of a 12-year-old child. He often raved about Communists, foreigners, and Bugs Moran, whom he was convinced was plotting to kill him from his Ohio prison cell.

On January 21, 1947, Capone had a stroke. He regained consciousness and started to improve but contracted pneumonia. He suffered a fatal cardiac arrest the next day. On January 22, 1947 Al Capone died in his home in Miami Beach, Florida, surrounded by his family. 

==In popular culture==
One of the most notorious American gangsters of the 20th century, Capone has been the subject of numerous articles, books, and films. Capone's personality and character have been used in fiction as a model for crime lords and criminal masterminds ever since his death. The stereotypical image of a mobster wearing a blue pinstriped suit and tilted fedora is based on photos of Capone. His accent, mannerisms, facial construction, physical stature, and parodies of his name have been used for numerous gangsters in comics, movies, music, and literature.

===Literature===
*Capone is featured in Mario Puzo's The Godfather in a segment in which Luca Brasi kills two henchmen sent by Capone to kill Don Vito Corleone. 
*Capone is featured in the Kinky Friedman novel, The Love Song of J. Edgar Hoover (1997). 
*Al Capone is referenced in Gennifer Choldenko's 2004 historical fiction book, Al Capone Does My Shirts, and its sequel Al Capone Shines My Shoes.
*In a book of photographs titled New York City Gangland (2010), both Capone and his NYC bootlegging ally, Giuseppe "Joe the Boss" Masseria, appear in Prohibition-era "bathing beauty" portraits. www.NYCGangland.com 
*A reincarnated Capone is a major character in science fiction author Peter F. Hamilton's Night's Dawn Trilogy.
*Capone's appearance was the model for the dummy of Batman villain the Ventriloquist, aptly named Scarface.

===Film and television===
Capone has been portrayed on screen by:
*Rod Steiger in Al Capone (1959). 
*Neville Brand in the TV series The Untouchables and again in the movie The George Raft Story (1961). 
*José Calvo in Due mafiosi contro Al Capone (1966). 
*Jason Robards in The St. Valentine's Day Massacre (1967). 
*Ben Gazzara in Capone (1975). 
*Robert De Niro in The Untouchables (1987). 
*Ray Sharkey in The Revenge of Al Capone (1989)
*Eric Roberts in The Lost Capone (1990)
*William Forsythe in The Untouchables (1993–1994)
*William Devane as Al Capone in "" (13 November 1994) 
* F. Murray Abraham in Dillinger and Capone (1995).
*Anthony LaPaglia in Road to Perdition (2002), in a deleted scene. 
*Julian Littman in Al's Lads (2002)
*Jon Bernthal in (2009). 
*Stephen Graham in Boardwalk Empire (2010)

Actors playing characters based on Capone include:
*Wallace Beery as Louis 'Louie' Scorpio in The Secret Six (1931). 
*Ricardo Cortez as Goldie Gorio in Bad Company (1931). 
*Paul Lukas as Big Fellow Maskal in City Streets (1931). 
*Edward Arnold as Duke Morgan in Okay, America! (1932). 
*Jean Hersholt as Samuel 'Sam' Belmonte in The Beast of the City (1932). 
*Paul Muni as Antonio 'Tony' Camonte in Scarface (1932).
*C. Henry Gordon as Nick Diamond in Gabriel Over the White House (1933). 
*John Litel as 'Gat' Brady in Alcatraz Island (1937). 
*Barry Sullivan as Shubunka in The Gangster (1947). 
*Ralph Volkie as Big Fellow in The Undercover Man (1949). 
*Edmond O'Brien as Fran McCarg in Pete Kelly's Blues (1955). 
*Lee J. Cobb as Rico Angelo in Party Girl (1958). 
*George Raft as Spats Colombo and Nehemiah Persoff as Little Bonaparte in Some Like It Hot (1959). 
*Frank Ronzio as Litmus in Escape from Alcatraz (film) (1979) introduces himself to newcomer Charlie Butts as "Al Capone". The movie is set in 1962, 15 years after Capone's death.
*Al Pacino as Alphonse "Big Boy" Caprice in Dick Tracy (1990). 

===Music===
*Prince Buster, Jamaican ska and rocksteady musician, had his first hit in the UK with the single "Al Capone" in 1967. 
*The Specials, a UK ska revival group, reworked Prince Buster's track into their first single, "Gangsters", which featured the line "Don't call me Scarface!"
Graffiti of Al Capone made by Partizan fans in Belgrade, Serbia.
*Al Capone is referenced heavily in Prodigy's track "Al Capone Zone", produced by The Alchemist and featuring Keak Da Sneak. 
*Al Capone transcribed a love song called Madonna Mia while in prison. In May 2009, his rendition of the song was recorded for the first time in history. 
*He is referenced in a homonymous song by Brazilian singer Raul Seixas.
===Sport===
*Fans of Serbian football club Partizan are using Al Capone's character as a mascot for one of their subgroups called "Alcatraz", named after a prison in which Al Capone served his sentence. Also, as an honour to Al Capone, a graffiti representation of him exists in the center of Belgrade.

==See also==
* American Mafia
* List of Depression-era outlaws
* Scarface (1932 film)
* Scarface (1983 film)
* The Mystery of Al Capone's Vaults
* Timeline of organized crime
* Grand Rapids Hotel

==References==

==Further reading==
*Capone, Deirdre Marie; Uncle Al Capone - The Untold Story from Inside His Family. Recap Publishing LLC ISBN 978-0982845103
*Kobler, John. Capone: The Life and Times of Al Capone. New York: Da Capo Press, 2003. ISBN 0-306-81285-1
*Pasley, Fred D. Al Capone: The Biography of a Self-Made Man. Garden City, New York: Garden City Publishing Co., 2004. ISBN 1-4179-0878-5
*Schoenberg, Robert J. Mr. Capone. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1992. ISBN 0-688-12838-6
*MacDonald, Alan. Dead Famous – Al Capone and his Gang Scholastic.
*Hoffman Dennis E. Scarface Al and the Crime Crusaders: Chicago's Private War Against Capone Southern Illinois University Press; 1st edition (November 24, 1993) ISBN 978-0-8093-1925-1

== External links ==

*Al Capone: The Original Gangster – slideshow by Life magazine
*Mario Gomes' site on everything related to Al Capone
*South Beach Magazine The Un-Welcomed Visitor: Al Capone in Miami. (with photos)
*Complete FBI files on Al Capone
*Al Capone at the Crime Library

 



[[Amplifier]]

Generally, an amplifier or simply amp, is a device for increasing the power of a signal by use of an external energy source.

In popular use, the term usually describes an electronic amplifier, in which the input "signal" is usually a voltage or a current. In audio applications, amplifiers drive the loudspeakers used in PA systems to make the human voice louder or play recorded music. Amplifiers may be classified according to the input (source) they are designed to amplify (such as a guitar amplifier, to perform with an electric guitar), the device they are intended to drive (such as a headphone amplifier), the frequency range of the signals (Audio, IF, RF, and VHF amplifiers, for example), whether they invert the signal (inverting amplifiers and non-inverting amplifiers), or the type of device used in the amplification (valve or tube amplifiers, FET amplifiers, etc.).

A related device that emphasizes conversion of signals of one type to another (for example, a light signal in photons to a DC signal in amperes) is a transducer, a transformer, or a sensor. However, none of these amplify power.

== Figures of merit ==
The quality of an amplifier can be characterized by a number of specifications, listed below.

=== Gain ===
The gain of an amplifier is the ratio of output to input power or amplitude, and is usually measured in decibels.
(When measured in decibels it is logarithmically related to the power ratio: G(dB)=10 log(Pout /(Pin)). RF amplifiers are often specified in terms of the maximum power gain obtainable, while the voltage gain of audio amplifiers and instrumentation amplifiers will be more often specified (since the amplifier's input impedance will often be much higher than the source impedance, and the load impedance higher than the amplifier's output impedance).
* Example: an audio amplifier with a gain given as 20 dB will have a voltage gain of ten (but a power gain of 100 would only occur in the unlikely event the input and output impedances were identical).
If two equivalent amplifiers are being compared, the amplifier with higher gain settings would be more sensitive as it would take less input signal to produce a given amount of power. http://www.bcae1.com/gaincon2.htm 

=== Bandwidth===
The bandwidth of an amplifier is the range of frequencies for which the amplifier gives "satisfactory performance". The definition of "satisfactory performance" may be different for different applications. However, a common and well-accepted metric is the half power points (i.e. frequency where the power goes down by half its peak value) on the output vs. frequency curve. Therefore bandwidth can be defined as the difference between the lower and upper half power points. This is therefore also known as the bandwidth. Bandwidths (otherwise called "frequency responses") for other response tolerances are sometimes quoted (, etc.) or "plus or minus 1dB" (roughly the sound level difference people usually can detect).

The gain of a good quality full-range audio amplifier will be essentially flat between 20 Hz to about 20 kHz (the range of normal human hearing). In ultra high fidelity amplifier design, the amp's frequency response should extend considerably beyond this (one or more octaves either side) and might have points . Professional touring amplifiers often have input and/or output filtering to sharply limit frequency response beyond ; too much of the amplifier's potential output power would otherwise be wasted on infrasonic and ultrasonic frequencies, and the danger of AM radio interference would increase. Modern switching amplifiers need steep low pass filtering at the output to get rid of high frequency switching noise and harmonics.

=== Efficiency ===
Efficiency is a measure of how much of the power source is usefully applied to the amplifier's output. Class A amplifiers are very inefficient, in the range of 10–20% with a max efficiency of 25% for direct coupling of the output. Inductive coupling of the output can raise their efficiency to a maximum of 50%.

Drain efficiency is the ratio of output RF power to input DC power when primary input DC power has been fed to the drain of an FET. Based on this definition, the drain efficiency cannot exceed 25% for a class A amplifier that is supplied drain bias current through resistors (because RF signal has its zero level at about 50% of the input DC). Manufacturers specify much higher drain efficiencies, and designers are able to obtain higher efficiencies by providing current to the drain of the transistor through an inductor or a transformer winding. In this case the RF zero level is near the DC rail and will swing both above and below the rail during operation. While the voltage level is above the DC rail current is supplied by the inductor.

Class B amplifiers have a very high efficiency but are impractical for audio work because of high levels of distortion (See: Crossover distortion). In practical design, the result of a tradeoff is the class AB design. Modern Class AB amplifiers commonly have peak efficiencies between 30–55% in audio systems and 50-70% in radio frequency systems with a theoretical maximum of 78.5%.

Commercially available Class D switching amplifiers have reported efficiencies as high as 90%. Amplifiers of Class C-F are usually known to be very high efficiency amplifiers. RCA manufactured an AM broadcast transmitter employing a single class-C low mu triode with an RF efficiency in the 90% range.

More efficient amplifiers run cooler, and often do not need any cooling fans even in multi-kilowatt designs. The reason for this is that the loss of efficiency produces heat as a by-product of the energy lost during the conversion of power. In more efficient amplifiers there is less loss of energy so in turn less heat.

In RF linear Power Amplifiers, such as cellular base stations and broadcast transmitters, special design techniques can be used to improve efficiency. Doherty designs, which use a second output stage as a "peak" amplifier, can lift efficiency from the typical 15% up to 30-35% in a narrow bandwidth. Envelope Tracking designs are able to achieve efficiencies of up to 60%, by modulating the supply voltage to the amplifier in line with the envelope of the signal.

=== Linearity ===
An ideal amplifier would be a totally linear device, but real amplifiers are only linear within limits. 

When the signal drive to the amplifier is increased, the output also increases until a point is reached where some part of the amplifier becomes saturated and cannot produce any more output; this is called clipping, and results in distortion.

In most amplifiers a reduction in gain takes place before hard clipping occurs; the result is a compression effect, which (if the amplifier is an audio amplifier) sounds much less unpleasant to the ear. For these amplifiers, the compression point is defined as the input power (or output power) where the gain is less than the small signal gain. Sometimes this nonlinearity is deliberately designed in to reduce the audible unpleasantness of hard clipping under overload.

Ill effects of nonlinearity can be reduced with negative feedback.

Linearization is an emergent field, and there are many techniques, such as feedforward, predistortion, postdistortion, in order to avoid the undesired effects of the non-linearities.

=== Noise ===
This is a measure of how much noise is introduced in the amplification process. Noise is an undesirable but inevitable product of the electronic devices and components; also, much noise results from intentional economies of manufacture and design time. The metric for noise performance of a circuit is noise figure or noise factor. Noise figure is a comparison between the output signal to noise ratio and the thermal noise of the input signal.

=== Output dynamic range ===
Output dynamic range is the range, usually given in dB, between the smallest and largest useful output levels. The lowest useful level is limited by output noise, while the largest is limited most often by distortion. The ratio of these two is quoted as the amplifier dynamic range. More precisely, if S = maximal allowed signal power and N = noise power, the dynamic range DR is DR = (S + N ) /N. 

 

In many switched mode amplifiers, dynamic range is limited by the minimum output step size.

=== Slew rate ===
Slew rate is the maximum rate of change of the output, usually quoted in volts per second (or microsecond). Many amplifiers are ultimately slew rate limited (typically by the impedance of a drive current having to overcome capacitive effects at some point in the circuit), which sometimes limits the full power bandwidth to frequencies well below the amplifier's small-signal frequency response.

===Rise time===
The rise time, tr, of an amplifier is the time taken for the output to change from 10% to 90% of its final level when driven by a step input.
For a Gaussian response system (or a simple RC roll off), the rise time is approximated by: 

tr * BW = 0.35, where tr is rise time in seconds and BW is bandwidth in Hz.

=== Settling time and ringing===
The time taken for the output to settle to within a certain percentage of the final value (for instance 0.1%) is called the settling time, and is usually specified for oscilloscope vertical amplifiers and high accuracy measurement systems. Ringing refers to an output variation that cycles above and below an amplifier's final value and leads to a delay in reaching a stable output. Ringing is the result of overshoot caused by an underdamped circuit.

===Overshoot===
In response to a step input, the overshoot is the amount the output exceeds its final, steady-state value.

===Stability===
Stability is an issue in all amplifiers with feedback, whether that feedback is added intentionally or results unintentionally. It is especially an issue when applied over multiple amplifying stages.

Stability is a major concern in RF and microwave amplifiers. The degree of an amplifier's stability can be quantified by a so-called stability factor. There are several different stability factors, such as the Stern stability factor and the Linvil stability factor, which specify a condition that must be met for the absolute stability of an amplifier in terms of its two-port parameters.

== Electronic amplifiers ==

There are many types of electronic amplifiers, commonly used in radio and television transmitters and receivers, high-fidelity ("hi-fi") stereo equipment, microcomputers and other electronic digital equipment, and guitar and other instrument amplifiers. Critical components include active devices, such as vacuum tubes or transistors.

== Other amplifier types ==
=== Carbon microphone ===
One of the first devices used to amplify signals was the carbon microphone (effectively a sound-controlled variable resistor). By channeling a large electric current through the compressed carbon granules in the microphone, a small sound signal could produce a much larger electric signal. The carbon microphone was extremely important in early telecommunications; analog telephones in fact work without the use of any other amplifier. Before the invention of electronic amplifiers, mechanically coupled carbon microphones were also used as amplifiers in telephone repeaters for long distance service.

=== Magnetic amplifier ===

A magnetic amplifier is a transformer-like device that makes use of the saturation of magnetic materials to produce amplification. It is a non-electronic electrical amplifier with no moving parts. The bandwidth of magnetic amplifiers extends to the hundreds of kilohertz.

=== Rotating electrical machinery amplifier ===
A Ward Leonard control is a rotating machine like an electrical generator that provides amplification of electrical signals by the conversion of mechanical energy to electrical energy. Changes in generator field current result in larger changes in the output current of the generator, providing gain. This class of device was used for smooth control of large motors, primarily for elevators and naval guns.

Field modulation of a very high speed AC generator was also used for some early AM radio transmissions. OTB - Below 535, A Historical Review of Continuous Wave Radio Frequency Power Generators See Alexanderson alternator.

=== Johnsen-Rahbek effect amplifier ===
The earliest form of audio power amplifier was Edison's "electromotograph" loud-speaking telephone, which used a wetted rotating chalk cylinder in contact with a stationary contact. The friction between cylinder and contact varied with the current, providing gain. Edison discovered this effect in 1874, but the theory behind the Johnsen-Rahbek effect was not understood until the semiconductor era.

=== Mechanical amplifiers ===
Mechanical amplifiers were used in the pre-electronic era in specialized applications.

Early autopilot units designed by Elmer Ambrose Sperry incorporated a mechanical amplifier using belts wrapped around rotating drums; a slight increase in the tension of the belt caused the drum to move the belt. A paired, opposing set of such drives made up a single amplifier.
This amplified small gyro errors into signals large enough to move aircraft control surfaces.
A similar mechanism was used in the Vannevar Bush differential analyzer.

The electrostatic drum amplifier used a band wrapped partway around a rotating drum, and fixed at its anchored end to a spring. The other end connected to a speaker cone. The input signal was transformed up to high voltage, and added to a high voltage dc supply line. This voltage was connected between drum and belt. Thus the input signal varied the electric field between belt and drum, and thus the friction between them, and thus the amount of lateral movement of the belt and thus speaker cone.

Other variations on the theme also existed at one time.

=== Optical amplifiers ===

Optical amplifiers amplify light through the process of stimulated emission. See Laser and Maser.

=== Miscellaneous types ===
*There are also mechanical amplifiers, such as the automotive servo used in braking.
*Relays can be included under the above definition of amplifiers, although their transfer function is not linear (that is, they are either open or closed).
*Also purely mechanical manifestations of such digital amplifiers can be built (for theoretical, instructional purposes, or for entertainment), see e.g. domino computer.
*Another type of amplifier is the fluidic amplifier, based on the fluidic triode.

== See also ==

*Attenuator (electronics)
*Low noise amplifier
*Negative feedback amplifier
*Preamplifier

==References==

==External links==
*Efficiency of Microwave Devices



[[Army of Darkness]]

Army of Darkness, also known as Evil Dead III: Army of Darkness or simply Evil Dead III or Bruce Campbell vs Army of Darkness, is a 1992 horror comedy action film directed by Sam Raimi. It is the third and final installment in The Evil Dead trilogy. The film was written by Raimi and his brother Ivan, produced by Robert Tapert, and stars Bruce Campbell and Embeth Davidtz. Continuing from Evil Dead II, Ash Williams is trapped in the Middle Ages and he battles the undead in his quest to return to the present.

Army of Darkness is not as violent or gory as the prior Evil Dead films, relying more on slapstick. The film was produced as part of a production deal with Universal Studios after the financial success of Darkman. Filming took place in California in 1991. The Director's Cut premiered in October 1992 and the Theatrical Cut was released in the US on February 19, 1993. It was a commercial success, grossing $21.5 Million, though critical response was generally less positive than the first two films. Since its video release it has acquired a cult following, along with the other two films in the trilogy.

==Plot==
After being pulled through a time portal, Ash Williams lands in 1300 AD, where he is almost immediately captured by Lord Arthur's men, who suspect him to be an agent for Duke Henry, with whom Arthur is at war. He is enslaved along with the captured Henry, his gun and chainsaw confiscated, and is taken to a castle. Ash is thrown in a pit where he fights off a Deadite and regains his weapons from Arthur's Wise Man. After demanding Henry and his men be set free (as he knew Henry was innocent, and his persecution was simply a witch hunt), Ash is celebrated as a hero. He also grows attracted to Sheila, the sister of one of Arthur's fallen knights.

According to the Wise Man, the only way Ash can return to his time is to retrieve the Necronomicon. After bidding goodbye to Sheila, Ash starts his search for the Necronomicon. Entering a haunted forest, an unseen force pursues Ash through the woods. Fleeing, Ash ducks into a windmill where he crashes into a mirror. The small reflections of Ash climb out from the shattered mirror and torment him. One of the reflections dives down Ash's throat and uses his body to become a life-sized copy of Ash, after which Ash kills him and buries him.

When he arrives at the Necronomicon's location, he finds three books instead of one. Ash eventually finds the real one and attempts to say the magic phrase that will allow him to remove the book safely — "Klaatu barada nikto". However, forgetting the last word, he tries to trick the book by mumbling the missing word. He then grabs the book from the cradle, and rushes back to the castle, while the dead rise from graves all around. During Ash's panicked ride back, Ash's evil copy rises from his grave and unites the Deadites into the Army of Darkness.

Despite causing the predicament faced by the Medieval soldiers, Ash initially demands to be returned to his own time. However, Sheila is captured by a Flying Deadite, and then transformed into a Deadite. Ash becomes determined to lead the humans against the skeletal Deadite army. Reluctantly, the people agree to join Ash. Using scientific knowledge from textbooks in the trunk of his 1973 Oldsmobile Delta 88, and enlisting the help of Duke Henry, Ash successfully leads the Medieval soldiers to defeat his Deadite clone, Evil Ash, and his Deadite Army, and save Sheila. After this, he is brought back to his own time using a potion made from the Necronomicon. Later, Ash is at the S-Mart store telling a male co-worker (Ted Raimi) all about his adventure back in time, and how he could have been king. A female customer becomes possessed by a demon and starts wreaking havoc on the store, and Ash slays the creature.

==Cast==
* Bruce Campbell as Ashley J. "Ash" Williams
* Embeth Davidtz as Sheila
* Marcus Gilbert as Lord Arthur
* Ian Abercrombie as Wiseman
* Richard Grove as Duke Henry the Red
* Timothy Patrick Quill as Blacksmith
* Michael Earl Reid as Gold Tooth
* Bridget Fonda as Linda
* Patricia Tallman as Possessed Witch
* Theodore Raimi as Cowardly Warrior / Second Supportive Villager / S-Mart Clerk

==Production==
Plans to make a third Evil Dead film had been circulating for a number of years, even prior to the production of Darkman. Evil Dead II made enough money internationally that Dino De Laurentiis was willing to finance a sequel. Director and script writer Sam Raimi drew from a variety of sources, including literature with A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court and Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels and films like The Seventh Voyage of Sinbad, Jason and the Argonauts, and The Three Stooges. Evil Dead II, according to Bruce Campbell, "was originally designed to go back into the past to 1300, but we couldn't muster it at the time, so we decided to make an interim version, not knowing if the 1300 story would ever get made". Promotional drawings were created and published in Variety during the casting process before the budget was deemed too little for the plot. The working title for the project was Evil Dead III: Army of Darkness. Warren 2000, p. 107. The title "Army of Darkness" came from an idea by Irvin Shapiro, during the production of Evil Dead II. Sam Raimi. DVD audio commentary, 3:12. This was used after Sam Raimi was unable to use his original title "The Medieval Dead." ("The Medieval Dead" would later be used as the films subtitle for its UK release as Army of Darkness: The Medieval Dead).

===Screenplay and pre-production===
Initially, Raimi invited Scott Spiegel to co-write Army of Darkness because he had done a good job on Evil Dead II, but he was busy on rewrites for the Clint Eastwood film, The Rookie. Warren 2000, p. 140. After the good experience of writing the screenplay for a film called Easy Wheels, Sam and his brother Ivan Raimi decided to co-write the film together. Warren 2000, p. 142. They worked on the script throughout the pre-production and production of Darkman. After filming Darkman, they took the script out and worked on it in more detail. Raimi says that Ivan "has a good sense of character" and that he brought more comedy into the script. Campbell remembers, "We all decided, 'Get him out of the cabin.' There were earlier drafts where part three still took place there, but we thought, 'Well, we all know that cabin, it's time to move on.' The three of us decided to keep it in 1300, because it's more interesting". Campbell and Tapert would read the script drafts, give Raimi their notes and he would decide which suggestions to keep and which ones to discard. Warren 2000, p. 145. 

The initial budget was $8 million but during pre-production, it became obvious that this was not going to be enough. Darkman was also a financial success and De Laurentiis had multi-picture deal with Universal and so Army of Darkness became one of the films. The studio decided to contribute half of the film's $12 million budget. Warren 2000, p. 144. However, the film's ambitious scope and its extensive effects work forced Campbell, Raimi and producer Rob Tapert to put up $1 million of their collective salaries to shoot a new ending and not film a scene where a possessed woman pushes down some giant pillars. Visual effects supervisor William Mesa showed Raimi storyboards he had from Victor Fleming's film Joan of Arc that depicted huge battle scenes and he picked out 25 shots to use in Army of Darkness. A storyboard artist worked closely with the director in order to blend the shots from the Joan of Arc storyboards with the battle scenes in his film. 

===Principal photography===
Principal photography took place between soundstage and on-location work. Army of Darkness was filmed in Bronson Canyon and Vasquez Rocks Natural Area Park. The interior shots were filmed on an Introvision stage in Hollywood. Raimi's use of the Introvision process was a tribute to the stop-motion animation work of Ray Harryhausen. Muir 2004, p. 153. Introvision uses front-projected images with live actors instead of the traditional rear projection that Harryhausen and others used. Introvision blended components with more realistic-looking results. To achieve this effect, Raimi used 60-foot-tall Scotchlite front-projection screens, miniatures and background plates. According to the director, the advantage of using this technique was "the incredible amount of interaction between the background, which doesn't exist, and the foreground, which is usually your character". 

The shooting for Army of Darkness began in mid-1991, and it lasted for about 100 days. Warren 2000, p. 147. It was a mid-summer shoot and while on location on a huge castle set that was built near Acton, California on the edge of the Mojave Desert, the cast and crew endured very hot conditions during the day and very cold temperatures at night. Muir 2004, p. 155. Most of the film took place at night and the filmmakers shot most of the film during the summer when the days were longest and the nights were the shortest. It would take an hour and a half to light an area leaving the filmmakers only six hours left to shoot a scene. Warren 2000, p. 151. Money problems forced cinematographer Bill Pope to shoot only for certain hours Monday through Friday because he could not be paid his standard fee. Mesa shot many of the action sequences on the weekend. Muir 2004, p. 156. 

It was a difficult shoot for Campbell who had to learn elaborate choreography for the battle scenes, which involved him remembering a number system because the actor was often fighting opponents that were not really there. Muir 2004, p. 157. Mesa remembers, "Bruce was cussing and swearing some of the time because you had to work on the number system. Sam would tell us to make it as complicated and hard for Bruce as possible. 'Make him go through torture!' So we'd come up with these shots that were really, really difficult, and sometimes they would take thirty-seven takes". Some scenes, like Evil Ash walking along the graveyard while his skeleton minions come to life, blended stop-motion animation with live skeletons that were mechanically rigged, with prosthetics and visual effects. 

===Soundtrack===
Danny Elfman, who composed the score for Darkman, wrote the "March of the Dead" theme for Army of Darkness, Warren 2000, p. 153. but after the re-shoots were completed Joseph LoDuca, who composed the music for The Evil Dead and Evil Dead II, returned to score the new film. Muir 2004, p. 160. LoDuca sat down with Raimi and they went over the entire film, scene by scene. The composer used his knowledge of synthesizers and was able to present many cues in a mock-up form before he took them in front of an orchestra. 

===Post-production===
While Dino De Laurentiis gave Raimi and his crew freedom to shoot the movie the way they wanted, Universal Pictures took over during post-production. Muir 2004, p. 159. Universal was not happy with Raimi's cut because it did not like his original ending of the movie and felt that it was negative. A more upbeat ending was shot a month after Army of Darkness was made. It was shot in a lumber store in Malibu, California over three or four nights. Then, two months after Army of Darkness was finished, a round of re-shoots began in Santa Monica and involved Ash in the windmill and the scenes with Bridget Fonda done for very little money. Raimi recalls, "Actually, I kind of like the fact that there are two endings, that in one alternate universe Bruce is screwed, and in another universe he's some cheesy hero". Warren 2000, p. 156. 

In addition, Raimi needed $3 million to finish his movie, but Universal was not willing to give him the money and delayed its release because they were upset that De Laurentiis would not give them the rights to the Hannibal Lecter character so that they could film a sequel to Jonathan Demme's The Silence of the Lambs. Muir 2004, p. 162. The matter was finally resolved, but Army of Darkness release date had been pushed back from its original summer of 1992 release to February 1993.

For the movie's poster, Universal brought Campbell in to take several reference head shots and asked him to strike a sly look on his face. They showed him a rough of this Frank Frazetta-like painting. The actor had a day to approve it or, as he was told, there would be no ad campaign for the film. Warren 2000, p. 158. Raimi ran into further troubles with the Motion Picture Association of America over the film's rating. The MPAA gave it an NC-17 rating for a shot of a female Deadite being decapitated early on in the film. Universal, however, wanted a PG-13 rating, so Raimi made a few cuts and was still stuck with the MPAA's R rating. In response, Universal turned the film over to outside film editors who cut Army of Darkness to 81 minutes in length and another version running 87 minutes that was eventually released in theaters, ending up with an R rating as a result. 

==Release==
===Box office performance===
Army of Darkness was released by Universal Pictures on February 19, 1993 in 1,387 theaters in the United States, grossing $4.4 million (38.5% of total gross) on its first weekend. In total, the film earned $11.5 million in the US and $21.5 million worldwide.

===Critical reception===
Army of Darkness had received generally positive response from critics, with a 71% "Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 38 reviews, which made its critical reception above average but is lower than The Evil Dead and Evil Dead II, which received 100% and 98% critical approval, respectively. Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars and wrote, "The movie isn't as funny or entertaining as Evil Dead II, however, maybe because the comic approach seems recycled". In her review for the New York Times, Janet Maslin praised, "Mr. Campbell's manly, mock-heroic posturing is perfectly in keeping with the director's droll outlook". Desson Howe, in this review for the Washington Post praised the film's style: "Bill Pope's cinematography is gymnastic and appropriately frenetic. The visual and make-up effects (from artist-technicians William Mesa, Tony Gardner and others) are incredibly imaginative". However, Entertainment Weekly gave the film a "C+" rating and wrote, "This spoofy cast of thousands looks a little too much like a crew of bland Hollywood extras. By the time Army of Darkness turns into a retread of Jason and the Argonauts, featuring an army of fighting skeletons, the film has fallen into a ditch between parody and spectacle". 

===Awards===
Army of Darkness won the Saturn Award for Best Horror Film (1994). It was also nominated for Best Make-Up. Army of Darkness was nominated for the Grand Prize at Avoriaz Fantastic Film Festival, and won the Golden Raven at the Brussels International Festival of Fantasy Film in 1993. The film also won the Critics' Award at Fantasporto, and was nominated for the International Fantasy Film Award in the category of Best Film in 1993. It was also nominated Best Film at the Sitges - Spanish International Film Festival. 

==Comics==

Army of Darkness had a comic book adaptation and several comic book sequels.
* Army of Darkness (movie adaptation)
* 2 Ashes|Army of Darkness: Ashes 2 Ashes]
* till You Drop Dead|Army of Darkness: Shop till You Drop Dead]
* Darkman vs. Army of Darkness
* Army of Darkness vs. Re-Animator
* 
* Army of Darkness: Ash vs. The Classic Monsters
* Marvel Zombies vs. The Army of Darkness
* 
* Army of Darkness: Long Road Home
* Freddy vs. Jason vs. Ash
* 
* Army of Darkness/Xena: Warrior Princess: Why Not?
* Xena vs. Army of Darkness: What Again?

==References==

===Bibliography===
* The Evil Dead Companion, Bill Warren. ISBN 0-312-27501-3
* If Chins Could Kill, Bruce Campbell. ISBN 0-312-29145-0
* The Unseen Force: The Films of Sam Raimi, John Kenneth Muir.

==External links==

* Army of Darkness at Deadites Online.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Army of Darkness RPG from Eden Studios.
* Army of Darkness at Hollywood Teen Movies



[[RUR-5 ASROC]]

:"ASROC" redirects to this page. For the vertical-launch variant, see RUM-139 VL-ASROC.

ASROC (for Anti-Submarine ROCket) is an all-weather, all sea-conditions anti-submarine missile system. Developed by the United States Navy in the 1950s, it was deployed in the 1960s, updated in the 1990s, and eventually installed on over 200 USN surface ships, specifically cruisers, destroyers, and frigates. The ASROC has been deployed on scores of warships of many other navies, including Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Republic of China, Greece, Pakistan and others. 

==History==
ASROC started development as the Rocket Assisted Torpedo (RAT) program by the Naval Ordnance Station at China Lake in the early 1950 to develop as surface warship ASW weapon counter to the new post-World War Two submarines which ran quieter, at much higher speed and could attack from much longer range with high speed homing torpedoes. In addition to take advantage of modern sonars with a much larger detection range. Also an extended range torpedo delivered by parachute from the air allowed warships the stand-off to attack hostile submarines with very little advance notice to the hostile submarine. The RAT program came in three phrases. "Navy Homing Torpedoes Fights Subs." Popular Mechanics, April 1958, p. 108. RAT-A, RAT-B and RAT-C. RAT-A and RAT-B was a program to develop a compact and economical stand-off ASW for smaller warships. But was found to be either unreliable or had to short a range. RAT-C was a program to develop a stand-off ASW weapon that used a nuclear depth charge. This would require a range of at least 8,000 yard to escape damage from the under water blast. Unlike the original RAT program rockets the RAT-C was considerably larger to accomplish the extended range needed and was to be fitted to larger warships. With the failure of both the RAT-A and RAT-B program, RAT-C was redesigned from a stand-off nuclear ASW weapon to one that could use not only a nuclear depth charge but also homing ASW torpedo. To accomplish the accuracy needed, the RAT-C rocket launcher had to be redesigned with larger side fins. This program final combined reliability, accuracy along with with the necessary stand-off range. But before RAT-C reached initial operational status in 1960 aboard the large US Navy destroyer-leader Norfolk, it's name was changed to the present ASROC. Bill Gunston Rocket & Missiles, Salamander Books Ltd 1979, ISSB 0-517-26870-1 Norman Friedman U.S. Destroyers Naval Institute Press (April 1982), ISBN-10-08702-1733X, p. 280 

==Description==

After a surface ship, patrol plane or anti-submarine helicopter detects an enemy submarine by using sonar and/or other sensors, it could relay the sub's position to an ASROC-equipped ship for attack. The attacking ship would then fire an ASROC missile carrying an acoustic homing torpedo or a Nuclear Depth Bomb (NDB) onto an unguided ballistic trajectory toward the target. At a pre-determined point on the missile's trajectory, the payload separates from the missile and deploys a parachute to permit splashdown and water entry at a low speed and with minimum detectable noise. The water entry activates the torpedo, which is guided by its own sonar system, and homes in on the target using either active sonar or passive sonar. 

In cases where the ASROC missile carried an NDB, the unguided bomb would sink quickly to a predetermined depth where it would detonate. The nuclear-armed ASROC was never used beyond one or two tests in 1961-62. Eventually the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty banning underwater nuclear tests went into effect. The nuclear weapon was never used in combat. An ASROC missile could hypothetically carry a 10 kiloton W44 nuclear warhead, although the W44-armed nuclear weapons were retired by 1989, and all types of nuclear depth bombs were removed from deployment. 

Destroyer USS Agerholm fires an ASROC with a nuclear depth bomb in the "Swordfish" test in 1962

The first ASROC system using the MK-112 "Matchbox" launcher, was developed in the 1950s and installed in the 1960s. This system was phased out in the 1990s and replaced with the RUM-139 Vertical Launch ASROC, or "VLA". 

ASROC 'Matchbox' mounting installed just aft of the 76 mm gun turret on the Japanese Self Defense Force Asagiri class destroyer DD 158 Umigiri, photographed 28 July 2008 departing from Portsmouth Naval Base, UK.

ASROC 'Matchbox' reload doors can clearly be seen in this photograph of the Japanese Asagiri class destroyer Asagiri, formerly DD 156, renumbered TV 3516 after reclassification as a training vessel, seen here on 28 July 2008 departing from Portsmouth Naval Base, UK.

==Specific Installations==

The 31 U.S. Navy Spruance-class destroyers were all built in the shipyard with the Mark 16 Mod 7 ASROC Launching Group and MK 4 ASROC Weapons Handling System (AWHS) reload system. These had one standard Mark 112 octuple ASROC launcher, located immediately above a reload system holding an additional 16 assembled rounds (two complete reloads of eight missiles apiece). Thus, each Spruance-class destroyer originally carried a maximum total of 24 ASROC. US Destroyers - Norman Friedman 

Most other U.S. Navy and allied navy destroyers, destroyer escorts, frigates, and several different classes of cruisers only carried the one ASROC 'matchbox' MK 112 launcher with eight ASROC missiles (although later in service, some of those missiles could be replaced by the Harpoon anti-ship missile). The "matchbox" Mk 112 launchers were capable of carrying a mixture of the two types. Reloads were carried in many classes, either on first level of the superstructure immediately abaft the launcher, or in a separate deckhouse just forward or abaft the Mk 112. 

The MK 16 Launching Group also had configurations that supported HARPOON RGM-84 (Onboard Knox Class Destroyer Escorts (Fast Frigates)) or a variation of the Tartar missile in limited distribution. 

Ships with the Mk 26 GMLS, and late marks of the Mk 10 GMLS aboard the "Belknap"-class, could accommodate ASROC in these power-loaded launchers (the Mk 13 GMLS was not able to fire the weapon, as the launcher rail was too short).

Most Spruance-class destroyers were later modified to include the Mk 41 VLS, these launchers are capable of carrying a mixture of the VL-ASROC, the Tomahawk TLAM, and other missiles. All of the Spruance destroyers carried two separate quad Harpoon launchers. Other US ships with the Mk 41 can also accommodate VL-ASROC.

==Operators==
;
;
;
;
;
;
;
;
;
;
;
;
;
;

==See also==

* Ikara
* Hong Sang Eo (Red Shark) rocket-based torpedo (K-ASROC)
* Malafon
* MILAS
* RUM-139 VL-ASROC
* Sea Lance
* SUBROC
* Terasca

==References==

==External links==
* http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/missile/vla.htm
* http://www.gyrodynehelicopters.com/asroc.htm
* http://designation-systems.net/dusrm/r-5.html

RUR005
Mk016



[[Ahmed al-Nami]]

A former law student and muezzin, Ahmed bin Abdullah al-Nami (Arabic: أحمد بن عبد الله النامي, ; also transliterated as Alnami) (December 7, 1977 – September 11, 2001) was one of four hijackers of United Airlines Flight 93 as part of the September 11 attacks. 

Born in Saudi Arabia, Nami had served as a muezzin and was a college student. He left his family in 2000 to complete the Hajj, but later went to Afghanistan bound for an al-Qaeda training camp where he befriended other future hijackers and would soon be chosen to participate in the attacks.

He arrived in the United States in May 2001, on a tourist visa, where he would settle in Florida up until the attacks. On September 11, 2001, Nami boarded United 93 and assisted in the hijacking of the plane, which crashed into a field in rural Shanksville, Pennsylvania, after a passenger uprising, due to the passengers receiving information from their families of the 3 other hijacked planes that hit the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.

==History==

Nami, much like Abdulaziz al-Omari, Wail al-Shehri, Waleed al-Shehri, and Mohand al-Shehri was born in the 'Asir Province in Saudi Arabia. Born to the Quraish tribe of Saudi Arabia, Videotape of recorded will of Abdulaziz al-Omari and others Nami served as a muezzin at the Seqeley mosque after having reportedly become very religious sometime in early 1999. That autumn he enrolled in the King Khaled University at Abha to study Sharia, he left his family home in Khamis Mushayt in the summer of 2000 to complete the Hajj, but never returned – instead travelling to the Al Farouq training camp in Afghanistan where he met and befriended Waleed and Wail al-Shehri, two brothers from Khamis Mushayt, and Saeed al-Ghamdi. The four reportedly pledged themselves to Jihad in the Spring of 2000, in a ceremony presided over by Wail – who had dubbed himself Abu Mossaeb al-Janubi after one of Muhammad's companions. Boston Globe, Driving a Wedge: Part I Dubbed "Abu Hashim", Nami was considered "gentle in manner" by his colleagues, and reported that he had a dream in which he rode a mare along with Muhammad, and that the prophet told him to dismount and fight his enemies to liberate his land. 

During his time at al-Farooq, there is a curious mention under Mushabib al-Hamlan's details that Nami had recently had laser eye surgery, an uncited fact that does not reappear. 

By October he had taken a prospective hijacker Mushabib al-Hamlan from Afghanistan to Saudi Arabia where they both procured B-1/B-2 tourist/business visas on October 28 – but Hamlan then decided not to proceed and is thought to have returned to his family. Nami's Visa application has since been reviewed, and while he mentioned that Mushabib will be travelling with him, he listed his occupation as student but failed to provide an address for his school, and listed his intended address in the United States merely as Los Angeles – in the end he never used this Visa to enter the United States, and reported his passport (C115007, which showed evidence of travel to Afghanistan) as "lost", and procured a new one from Jeddah (C505363). He used the new passport to acquire a new B-1/B-2 visa in Jeddah on April 23, again recopying his answers from previously although crossing out the lines regarding Mushabib and previous attempts to acquire a visa. He was interviewed by a consular officer, who again approved his application. Records at the time only recorded past failures to procure a visa, so the officer had no way of realising that Nami had successfully received an earlier visa.

In mid-November 2000, the 9/11 Commission believes that Nami, Wail and Waleed al-Shehri, all of whom had obtained their U.S. visas in late October, traveled in a group from Saudi Arabia to Beirut and then onward to Iran where they could travel through to Afghanistan without getting their passports stamped. This probably followed their return to Saudi Arabia to get "clean" passports. An associate of a senior Hezbollah operative is thought to have been on the same flight, although this may have been a coincidence. 

While in the United Arab Emirates, Nami purchased traveler's cheques presumed to have been paid for by Mustafa al-Hawsawi. Five other hijackers also passed through the UAE and purchased travellers cheques, including Majed Moqed, Saeed al-Ghamdi, Hamza al-Ghamdi, Ahmed al-Haznawi and Wail al-Shehri.

===2001===
In March 2001, Ahmed al-Nami appeared in an al-Qaeda farewell video showing 13 of the muscle hijackers before they left their training centre in Kandahar; while he does not speak, he is seen studying maps and flight manuals.

On April 23, Nami was recorded obtaining a new US Visa. 

On May 28, Nami arrived in the United States from Dubai with fellow-hijackers Mohand al-Shehri and Hamza al-Ghamdi. By early June, Nami was living in apartment 1504 at the Delray Racquet Club condominiums with Saeed al-Ghamdi in Delray Beach, Florida. He telephoned his family in 'Asir shortly after arriving in the country.

In June, he phoned his family for the last time. 

He was one of 9 hijackers to open a SunTrust bank account with a cash deposit around June 2001, and on June 29 received either a Florida State Identification Card or Drivers License. 

He may have been one of three hijackers that listed the Naval Air Station in Pensacola, Florida as their permanent address on drivers' licenses, though other sources claim he listed the Delray condominium.

On August 28, Nami and Ahmed al-Haznawi reportedly bothered a Delray Beach resident, Maria Siscar Simpson, to let them through her apartment to retrieve a towel that had fallen off their balcony onto hers. 

On September 5, Nami and Saeed al-Ghamdi purchased tickets for a September 7 flight to Newark at Mile High Travel on Commercial Boulevard—paying cash for their tickets. Ziad Jarrah and Ahmed al-Haznawi also purchased tickets for the same flight from Passage Tours.

On September 7, all four Flight 93 hijackers flew from Fort Lauderdale to Newark International Airport aboard Spirit Airlines.

==Attacks==

On September 11, 2001, Nami arrived in Newark to board United Airlines Flight 93 along with Saeed al-Ghamdi, Ahmed al-Haznawi and Ziad Jarrah. Some reports suggest Haznawi was pulled aside for screening while others claim there is no record of whether any of the four were screened; the lack of CCTV cameras at the time has compounded the problem. Nami boarded the plane between 7:39 am and 7:48 am; seated in First Class 3C, next to Saeed al-Ghamdi.

Due to the flight's routine delay, the pilot and crew were notified of the previous hijackings and were told to be on the alert, though within two minutes Jarrah had stormed the cockpit leaving the pilots dead or injured.

At least two of the cellphone calls made by passengers indicate that all the hijackers they saw were wearing red bandanas, which some have questioned may have signified an allegiance to the Egyptian Islamic Jihad. The calls also indicated that one of the men had tied a box around his torso, and claimed there was a bomb inside; it is not known which hijacker this was.

Passengers on the plane heard through phone calls the fates of the other hijacked planes, and organized a brief assault to retake the cockpit. It is believed the hijackers crashed the plane into the Pennsylvania farmland rather than cede control of the plane. All aboard died.

==Aftermath==
After the attacks, an employee of Saudi Arabian Airlines named Ahmed al-Nami came forward to say that he feared his identity had been stolen, although he had never lost his passport.

==References==

==External links==

* The Final 9/11 Commission Report
* Report that an Ahmed al-Nami is still alive



[[Ahmed al-Haznawi]]

Ahmed Ibrahim al-Haznawi (, ) (October 11, 1980 &ndash; September 11, 2001) was one of four hijackers of United Airlines Flight 93 as part of the September 11 attacks. 

A Saudi, Haznawi had trained in Afghanistan after leaving his family to fight in Chechnya in 2000. He arrived in the United States in June 2001 under the direction of Al-Qaeda for terrorist attacks, on a tourist visa. Once he was in the U.S., he settled in Florida and helped plan out how the attacks would take place.

On September 11, 2001, Haznawi boarded United Airlines Flight 93 and assisted in the hijacking of the plane, which crashed into a field in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, after a passenger uprising.

==Early life==
Ahmed al-Haznawi was the son of a Saudi imam from the Al-Bahah province, which is located in an isolated and underdeveloped part of Saudi Arabia. Haznawi grew up in the village of Hezna, where his father was a cleric at the mosque in the central marketplace section of the village. Haznawi belonged to a family that was part of the larger, al-Ghamdi tribe, sharing the same tribal affiliation with fellow hijackers Saeed al-Ghamdi, Hamza al-Ghamdi, and Ahmed al-Ghamdi. 

He memorised the Quran, giving him the title Hafiz. Bell, Stewart. "The Martyr's Oath", 2005. 

==History==
===1999&ndash;2000===
Haznawi announced he was leaving his family in 1999 to help fight in Chechnya, although his father forbade him. His father and brother, Abdul Rahman al-Haznawi, reportedly last heard from him in late 2000, after he made references to training in Afghanistan.

On November 12, 2000, Haznawi applied for and received a two-year US B-1/B-2
(tourist/business) visa in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 

From November 27, 2000 through December 27, 2000, Haznawi was in Saudi Arabia for Ramadan. It is theorized that during this trip, he may have initially told Saeed and Hamza al-Ghamdi about the operation.

Some time late in 2000, Haznawi traveled to the United Arab Emirates, where he purchased traveler's cheques presumed to have been paid for by Mustafa al-Hawsawi. Five other hijackers also passed through the UAE and purchased travellers cheques, including Majed Moqed, Saeed al-Ghamdi, Hamza al-Ghamdi, Wail al-Shehri and Ahmed al-Nami.

===2001===
Haznawi appeared in an al-Qaeda video, pledging to give his life to martyrdom.
He was one of four hijackers believed to be staying at a Kandahar guest house in March 2001, where they were seen by Mohammed Jabarah. Jabarah remembered Haznawi specifically, saying that he was "very devout and could recite the entire Koran from memory". Ressa, Maria. "Seeds of Terror", 2003. p. 165 

On June 8 he arrived in Miami, Florida with fellow hijacker Wail al-Shehri. He was one of 9 hijackers to open a SunTrust bank account with a cash deposit around June 2001. He is believed to have moved in with Ziad Jarrah, who got a new apartment on Bougainvilla Dr. in Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, after both men gave the landlord photocopies of their German passports, which he later turned over to the FBI. Miami Herald: Hijack plotters used S. Florida as a cradle for conspiracy 

On June 25, Jarrah took Haznawi to Holy Cross Hospital in Fort Lauderdale on advice of his landlord Charles Lisa. Haznawi was treated by Dr. Christos Tsonas, who gave him antibiotics for a small gash on his left calf. While he told staff that he had bumped into a suitcase, Memo on Florida Case Roils Anthrax Probe Washington Post, March 29, 2002 the media briefly reported it as a sign of cutaneous anthrax and a possible link to the 2001 anthrax attacks, although FBI later addressed the rumors stating that "Exhaustive testing did not support that anthrax was present anywhere the hijackers had been." 

On July 10 Haznawi obtained a Florida driver's license, later obtaining another copy on September 7, 2001 by filling out a change-of-address form. Five other suspected hijackers also received duplicate Florida licenses in 2001, and others had licenses from different states. Some have speculated that this was to allow multiple persons to use the same identity. Multiple identities of hijack suspects confound FBI: South Florida Sun-Sentinel 

Jarrah and Haznawi both received their one-way tickets for United Airlines Flight 93, on September 5. Statement of Robert S. Mueller: Joint Investigation Into September 11: (published September 26, 2002) On September 7, all four Flight 93 hijackers flew from Fort Lauderdale to Newark International Airport aboard Spirit Airlines.

==Attacks==

On September 11, 2001, Haznawi arrived at Newark International Airport to board Flight 93. Although he was selected for additional security by CAPPS and screened, he was able to board the flight without incident, with only his checked bags requiring extra screening for explosives. 

Due to the flight's delay, the pilot and crew were notified of the previous hijackings that day and were told to be on the alert. Within minutes, Flight 93 was hijacked as well.

At least two of the cellphone calls made by passengers indicate that all the hijackers they saw were wearing red bandanas, which some believe may have signified an allegiance to the Egyptian Islamic Jihad. The calls also indicated that one of the men had tied a box around his torso, and claimed there was a bomb inside - it is not known which hijacker this was. Some passengers expressed doubt that the bomb was real.

Passengers on the plane heard through phone calls the fates of the other hijacked planes. A passenger uprising soon took place. Hijacker-pilot, Ziad Jarrah, crashed the plane into an empty field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania in order to prevent the passengers from gaining control of the plane. The crash killed everyone on board.

==Aftermath==
After the attacks, before the release of the FBI pictures of the hijackers, Arab News reported that Haznawi's brother Abdul Rahman had told al-Madinah newspaper that a photograph published by local newspapers bore no resemblance to his brother. Hanjour family denies Hani’s involvement in crime< Arab News, October 1 2001 

A videotape released with The Wills of the New York and Washington Battle Martyrs, was aired on Al Jazeera on April 16, 2002. While the name beneath the speaker read al-Ghamdi, the image is of Haznawi speaking. Officials suggested that the name was merely a reference to his tribal affiliation. The film was thought to have been made in March 2001. In it, he talked about his plans to bring the "bloodied message" to America. In September 2002, a similar tape made by Abdulaziz al-Omari appeared.

==References==

==External links==

* The Final 9/11 Commission Report
* Bin Laden tape with Haznawi



[[Athanasius of Alexandria]]

Athanasius of Alexandria () ca. (296-298) – d. 2 May 373 is also given the titles St. Athanasius the Great, St. Athanasius I of Alexandria, St Athanasius the Confessor and (in the Coptic Orthodox Church, mainly) St Athanasius the Apostolic. He was the 20th bishop of Alexandria. St. Athanasius the Apostolic - From the Coptic Synaxarium St. Athanasius Coptic Orthodox Church - Retrieved 14 April 2011. His long episcopate lasted 45 years (c. 8 June 328 - 2 May 373), of which over 17 years were spent in five exiles ordered by four different Roman emperors. He is considered to be a renowned Christian theologian, a Church Father, the chief defender of Orthodoxy against Arianism, and a noted Egyptian leader of the fourth century.

He is remembered for his role in the conflict with Arius and Arianism. In 325, at the age of 27, Athanasius had a leading role against the Arians in the First Council of Nicaea. At the time, he was a deacon and personal secretary of the 19th Bishop of Alexandria, Alexander. Nicaea was convoked by the Emperor Constantine in May–August 325 to address the Arian heresy that Christ is of a distinct substance from the Father. Durant, Will. Caesar and Christ. New York: Simon and Schuster. 1972. 

In June 328, at the age of 30, three years after Nicæa and upon the repose of Bishop Alexander, he became archbishop of Alexandria. He continued to lead the conflict against the Arians for the rest of his life and was engaged in theological and political struggles against the Emperors Constantine and Constantius and powerful and influential Arian churchmen, led by Arian Bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia and others. He was known as "Athanasius Contra Mundum". Within few years of his departure, St. Gregory of Nazianzus called him the "Pillar of the Church". His writings were well regarded by all Church fathers who followed, in both the West and the East. His writings show a rich devotion to the Word-become-man, great pastoral concern, and profound interest in monasticism.

Athanasius is counted as one of the Great Doctors of the Church in Eastern Orthodoxy where he is also labeled the "Father of Orthodoxy". He is also one of the four Great Doctors of the Church from the East in the Roman Catholic Church. He is renowned in the Protestant churches, who label him "Father of The Canon". Athanasius is venerated as a Christian saint, whose feast day is 2 May in Western Christianity, 15 May in the Coptic Orthodox Church, and 18 January in the other Eastern Orthodox churches. He is venerated by the Oriental and Eastern Orthodox, the Roman Catholics, the Lutherans, and the Anglican Communion.

==Biography==
St Athanasius was born in the city of Alexandria or possibly the nearby Nile Delta town of Damanhur ca. 296-298. It is speculated that his parents were wealthy enough to afford giving him an esteemed secular learning. In his earliest work the Heathen - On the Incarnation, written before 319, he repeatedly quoted Plato and used a definition from the Organon of Aristotle. He was also familiar with the theories of various philosophical schools, and in particular with the developments of Neo-Platonism. In later works, he quotes Homer more than once (Hist. Ar. 68, Orat. iv. 29). In his letter to Emperor Constantius, he presents a defense of himself bearing unmistakable traces of a study of Demosthenes de Corona (Fialon).

He came from a Christian family, despite accounts to the contrary, as in his writings he tells more that once of an aunt who taught him some principles of the Christian faith, and a father who did the same, as well as mentioning (once) his mother doing the same. He had a Christian brother, and later in his life, in one of his exiles, he hid in his father's tomb in what appears to be described as a Christian cemetery.

He knew Greek and he admits to not knowing Hebrew e.g., the 39th Festal Letter of St. Athan.. The Old Testament passages he quotes frequently come from the Septuagint Greek translation. Ignorant of Hebrew, and only rarely appealing to other Greek versions (to Aquila once in the Ecthesis, to other versions once or twice on the Psalms), his knowledge of the Old Testament is limited to the Septuagint. ᾽Αλεξανδρεὺς τῷ γένει, ἀνὴρ λόγιος, δυνατὸς ὢν ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς He was able to write a letter in exile, with no access to a copy of the Scriptures, and quote from memory every verse in the Old Testament with reference to the Trinity without missing any. The combination of Scriptural study and of Greek learning was what one expects in a pupil of the famous Alexandrian School, the School of Clement, Origen, Dionysius and Theognostus.

At the time he was a student, the influence of Origen was still felt in the traditions of the theological school of Alexandria. It was from St. Alexander of Alexandria, Bishop of Alexandria, 312–328, himself an Origenist, that St Athanasius received his main instruction. His earliest work the Heathen - On the Incarnation, written before 319 bears traces of the Origenist Alexandrian thought but in an orthodox way. He later modified the philosophical thought of the School of Alexandria away from the Origenist principles such as the "entirely allegorical interpretation of the text" proposed by Origen.

He was ordained a deacon by the contemporary patriarch, Alexander of Alexandria, in 319. Encyclopedia Americana, vol. 2 Danbury, Connecticut: Grolier Incorporated, 1997. ISBN 0-7172-0129-5. In 325, he served as Alexander's secretary at the First Council of Nicaea. Already a recognized theologian and ascetic, he was the obvious choice to replace Alexander as the Patriarch of Alexandria on the latter's death in 328, Encyclopædia Britannica, 15th edition. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. ISBN 0-85229-633-0. despite the opposition of the followers of Arius and Meletius of Lycopolis. 

Athanasius spent the first years of his patriarchate visiting the churches with people of his territory, which at that time included all of Egypt and Libya. During this period, he established contacts with the hermits and monks of the desert, including Pachomius, which would be very valuable to him over the years. Shortly thereafter, Athanasius became occupied with the disputes with the Byzantine Empire and Arians which would occupy much of his life. 

Athanasius' first problem lay with the Meletians, who had failed to abide by the terms of the decision made at the First Council of Nicaea which had hoped to reunite them with the Church. Athanasius himself was accused of mistreating Arians and the followers of Meletius of Lycopolis, and had to answer those charges at a gathering of bishops in Tyre, the First Synod of Tyre, in 335. At that meeting, Eusebius of Nicomedia and the other supporters of Arius deposed Athanasius. On November 6, both parties of the dispute met with Constantine I in Constantinople. Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1993), 23 At that meeting, Athanasius was accused of threatening to interfere with the supply of grains from Egypt, and, without any kind of formal trial, was exiled by Constantine to Trier in the Rhineland. 

On the death of Emperor Constantine I, Athanasius was allowed to return to his See of Alexandria. Shortly thereafter, however, Constantine's son, the new Roman Emperor Constantius II, renewed the order for Athanasius' banishment in 338. Athanasius went to Rome, where he was under the protection of Constans, the Emperor of the West. During this time, Gregory of Cappadocia was installed as the Patriarch of Alexandria, usurping the absent Athanasius. Athanasius did, however, remain in contact with his people through his annual Festal Letters, in which he also announced on which date Easter would be celebrated that year. 

Pope Julius I wrote to the supporters of Arius strongly urging the reinstatement of Athanasius, but that effort proved to be in vain. He called a synod in Rome in the year 341 to address the matter, and at that meeting Athanasius was found to be innocent of all the charges raised against him. Julius also called the Council of Sardica in 343. This council confirmed the decision of the earlier Roman synod, and clearly indicated that the participants saw St Athanasius as the lawful Patriarch of Alexandria. It proved no more successful, however, as only bishops from the West and Egypt bothered to appear. 

"Early in the year 343, Athanasius went to Gaul, whither he had gone to consult the saintly Hosius of Corduba, the great champion of orthodoxy in the West. The two together set out for the Council of Sardica which had been summoned in deference to the Roman pontiff's wishes. At this great gathering of prelates the case of Athanasius was taken up and once more his innocence reaffirmed. Two conciliar letters were prepared, one to the clergy and faithful of Alexandria, the other to the bishops of Egypt and Libya, in which the will of the Council was made known. The persecution against the orthodox party broke out with renewed vigor, and Constantius II was induced to prepare drastic measures against Athanasius and the priests who were devoted to him. Orders were given that if the Saint attempted to re-enter his episcopal see, he should be put to death." Clifford, Cornelius, Catholic Encyclopedia 1930, Volume 2, Pgs: 35-40 "Athanasius". 

In 346, following the death of Gregory, Constans used his influence to allow Athanasius to return to Alexandria. Athanasius' return was welcomed by the majority of the people of Egypt who had come to view him as a national hero. This was the start of a "golden decade" of peace and prosperity, during which time Athanasius assembled several documents relating to his exiles and returns from exile in the Apology Against the Arians. However, upon Constans' death in 350, a civil war broke out which left Constantius as sole emperor. Constantius, renewing his previous policies favoring the Arians, banished Athanasius from Alexandria once again. This was followed, in 356, by an attempt to arrest Athanasius during a vigil service. Following this, Athanasius left for Upper Egypt, where he stayed in several monasteries and other houses. During this period, Athanasius completed his work Four Orations against the Arians and defended his own recent conduct in the Apology to Constantius and Apology for His Flight. Constantius' persistence in his opposition to Athanasius, combined with reports Athanasius received about the persecution of non-Arians by the new Arian bishop George of Laodicea, prompted Athanasius to write his more emotional History of the Arians, in which he described Constantius as a precursor of the Antichrist. 

In 361, after the death of Emperor Constantius, shortly followed by the murder of the very unpopular Bishop George, the popular St Athanasius now had the opportunity to return to his patriarchate. The following year he convened a council at Alexandria at which he appealed for unity among all those who had faith in Christianity, even if they differed on matters of terminology. This prepared the groundwork for the definition of the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity. In 362, the new Emperor Julian, noted for his opposition to Christianity, ordered Athanasius to leave Alexandria once again. Athanasius left for Upper Egypt, remaining there until Julian's death in 363. Two years later, the Emperor Valens, who favored the Arian position, in his turn exiled Athanasius. This time however, Athanasius simply left for the outskirts of Alexandria, where he stayed for only a few months before the local authorities convinced Valens to retract his order of exile. Some of the early reports explicitly indicate that Athanasius spent this period of exile in his ancestral tomb. 

Valens, who seems to have sincerely dreaded the possible consequences of a popular outbreak, gave orders within a few weeks for the return of Athanasius to his episcopal see. Here, St Athanasius, spent his remaining days, characteristically enough, in re-emphasizing the view of the Incarnation which had been defined at Nicaea.
He died peacefully in his own bed, surrounded by his clergy and faithful. 

===Year of birth===
St Athanasius' year of birth is given anywhere from 296-298 or in 293. The arguments for a later date (i.e., 296-298, and most probably 298) can be summarized as follows. The author of the Festal Index, who was the original collector of St. Athanasius' famed Festal Epistles (collected shortly after his death), stated that the Arians had accused St. Athanasius, among other accusations, that his ordination as Pope of Alexandria in 328 was not canonical because at the time of the consecration to the episcopate he had not yet attained the canonical age 30. While there is no reason to believe the Arian claim, it can be surmised that he was close enough to 30 years old in 328 for them to contemplate raising such an accusation.

In two distinct passages of his writings (Hist. Ar., lxiv, and De Syn., xviii), St Athanasius does not recall from memory being a first hand witness to the onset of the great persecution by the Tetrarchy of Diocletian and Maximian in February 303, for in referring to the events of this period he makes no direct appeal to his own personal recollections, but falls back on tradition. Being unable to recall the events from memory (because he was still young) places him at an age much younger than 10 in 303.

Moreover, his parents were still alive in Alexandria in 358, which would also place the date of his birth later rather than earlier. These considerations would seem to make it likely that he was born no earlier than 296 and no later than 298. The Catholic Encyclopedia states he was born c. 296.

The earlier date, 293, is sometimes assigned and apparently supported by the authority of a "Coptic Fragment" (published by Dr. O. von Lemm among the Mémoires de l'académie impériale des sciences de S. Péterbourg, 1888) and corroborated by the maturity revealed in his two earliest treatises Contra Gentes (Against the Heathens) and De Incarnatione (On the Incarnation), which were admittedly written about the year 318 before Arianism had begun to make itself felt, as those writings do not show an awareness of Arianism.

===National origin===
St Athanasius was an Egyptian born in the city of Alexandria or possibly the nearby Nile Delta town of Damanhur. His superior command of Greek, and the fact that the vast majority of his writings were in Greek, led some in the West to claim that he was a Greek born in Alexandria. However, in Coptic literature, St Athanasius is the first patriarch of Alexandria to use Coptic as well as Greek in his writings. Encyclopædia Britannica The fact that he assumed the Episcopal see of Alexandria at a time of rising Egyptian Nationalism and of him being a Noted Egyptian leader lends additional support to his Egyptian Ancestry.

He received secular, philosophical, as well as theological training at Alexandria. Specifically his theological learning was in the famed Catechetical School of Alexandria. He recounts being a student in that school who was educated by the Martyrs of the Great (tenth) and last persecution of Christianity at the hands of pagan Rome. This persecution was most severe in the East, particularly in Egypt and Palestine. Possibly one of his teachers was St. Peter of Alexandria, the 17th archbishop of Alexandria who was martyred in 311 in the closing days of that persecution.

===Exiles===
St Athanasius' long episcopate lasted 45 years (c. 8 June 328 - 2 May 373) of which over 17 years were spent in five exiles ordered by four different Roman Emperors, not counting approximately six more incidents in which he had to flee Alexandria for his own safety to escape people seeking to take his life.

First exile: under Emperor Constantine, for 2.5 years Jul 335 - 22 Nov 337; in Trier (Germany).

Second exile: under Emperor Constantius, for 7.5 years Apr 339 - 21 Oct 346; lived at Rome.

Third exile: under Emperor Constantius, for 6 years Feb 356 - 21 Feb 362; in the Egyptian desert.

Fourth exile: under Apostate Emperor Julian, 10 months Oct 362 - 5 Sep 363; in the Egyptian desert.

Fifth exile: under Emperor Valens, 4 months Oct 365 - 31 Jan 366; in his father's tomb.

==Works==

Athanasius other works include his two-part Against the Heathen and The Incarnation of the Word of God. Completed probably early in his life, before the Arian controversy, Justo L. Gonzalez in A History of Christian Thought notes (p292) that E. Schwartz places this work later, around 335, but "his arguments have not been generally accepted". The introduction to the CSMV translation of On the Incarnation places the work in 318, around the time Athanasius was ordained to the diaconate (St Athanasius On the Incarnation, Mowbray, England 1953) they constitute the first classic work of developed Orthodox theology. In the first part, Athanasius attacks several pagan practices and beliefs. The second part presents teachings on the redemption. Also in these books, Athanasius put forward the belief that the Son of God, the eternal Word through whom God created the world, entered that world in human form to lead men back into the harmony from which they had earlier fallen away. His other important works include his Letters to Serapion, which dealt with the divinity of the Holy Spirit, and his classic Life of St Anthony, which was translated into several languages and played an important role in the spreading of the ascetic ideal in Eastern and Western Christianity. He also wrote several works of Biblical exegesis, primarily of volumes in the Old Testament, which are preserved in excerpts regarding the Book of Genesis, the Song of Solomon, and Psalms. His works on ascetism, include the aforementioned Life of St. Anthony, as well as a Discourse on Virginity, a short work on Love and Self-Control, and a treatise On Sickness and Health which is only preserved in fragments.

Athanasius' letters include one "Letter Concerning the Decrees of the Council of Nicaea" (De Decretis), which is an account of the proceedings of that council, and another letter in the year 367 which was the first known listing of the New Testament including all those books now accepted everywhere as the New Testament. (earlier similar lists vary by the omission or addition of a few books, see Development of the New Testament canon). Several of his letters also survive. In one of these, to Epictetus of Corinth, Athanasius anticipates future controversies in his defense of the humanity of Christ. Another of his letters, to Dracontius, urges that monk to leave the desert for the more active duties of a bishop. 

There are several other works ascribed to him, although not necessarily generally accepted as being his own work. These include the Athanasian creed, which is today generally seen as being of 5th-century Galician origin. 

Athanasius was not what would be called a speculative theologian. As he stated in his First Letters to Serapion, he held on to "the tradition, teaching, and faith proclaimed by the apostles and guarded by the fathers." In some cases, this led to his taking the position that faith should take priority over reason. He held that not only was the Son of God consubstantial with the Father, but so was the Holy Spirit, which had a great deal of influence in the development of later doctrines regarding the Trinity. 

==Veneration==
Athanasius' Shrine (where a portion of his relics are preserved) under St. Mark's Cathedral, Cairo

St Athanasius was originally buried in Alexandria, Egypt, but his body was later transferred to the Chiesa di San Zaccaria in Venice, Italy. During Pope Shenouda III's visit to Rome from 4 May to 10 May 1973, Pope Paul VI gave the Coptic Patriarch a relic of Athanasius, Metropolitan Bishoy of Damiette which he brought back to Egypt on 15 May. Saint Athanasius The relic of St Athanasius the Great of Alexandria is currently preserved under the new Saint Mark Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Deir El-Anba Rowais, Abbassiya, Cairo, Egypt. The body of St Athanasius continues to repose in the Chiesa di San Zaccaria. Museum Planet, Chiesa di San Zaccaria Tour, http://www.museumplanet.com/tour.php/venice/zac/23 Sanidopoulos, John "The Incorrupt Relics of Saint Athanasios the Great" http://www.johnsanidopoulos.com/2010/05/incorrupt-relics-of-saint-athanasios.html 

The following is a troparion (hymn) to St Athanasius sung in some Eastern Orthodox churches.
: O Holy father Athanasius,
: like a pillar of orthodoxy
: you refuted the heretical nonsense of Arius
: by insisting that the Father and the Son are equal in essence.
: O venerable father, beg Christ our God to save our souls.

Athanasius is venerated as a saint by the majority of major Christian denominations which officially approve of and recognize saints. His feast day is observed on 2 May, the day of his death. In the Roman Catholic Church he is deemed a Doctor of the Church. 

He has been hailed as "the pillar of the Church" by Gregory of Nazianzus. 

St Gregory Nazianzen, fellow Doctor of the Church, 330-390, said in Or.21: "When I praise Athanasius, virtue itself is my theme: for I name every virtue as often as I mention him who was possessed of all virtues. He was the true pillar of the Church. His life and conduct were the rule of bishops, and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith." 

==Historical significance==

===Early life===
The Alexandria of his boyhood was an epitome—intellectually, morally, and politically—of the ethnically diverse Graeco-Roman world. It was the most important center of trade in the whole empire; and its primacy as an emporium of ideas was more commanding than that of Rome or Constantinople, Antioch or Marseilles. Its famous catechetical school, while sacrificing none of its famous passion for orthodoxy since the days of Pantaenus, Clement of Alexandria, and Origen of Alexandria, had begun to take on an almost secular character in the comprehensiveness of its interests, and had counted influential pagans among its serious auditors. Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., VI, xix 

St Athanasius seems to have been brought early in life under the immediate supervision of the ecclesiastical authorities of his native city. A story has been preserved by Rufinus (Hist. Eccl., I, xiv). Bishop Alexander, so the tale runs, had invited a number of fellow prelates to meet him at breakfast after a great religious function. While Alexander was waiting for his guests to arrive, he stood by a window, watching a group of boys at play on the seashore below the house. He had not observed them long before he discovered that they were imitating the elaborate ritual of Christian baptism. He sent for the children and, in the investigation that followed, it was discovered that one of the boys (none other than Athanasius) had acted the part of the bishop and in that character had actually baptized several of his companions in the course of their play. Alexander determined to recognize the make-believe baptisms as genuine, and decided that Athanasius and his playfellows should go into training in order to prepare themselves for a clerical career.

Sozomen speaks of his "fitness for the priesthood", and calls attention to the significant circumstance that he was "from his tenderest years practically self-taught". "Not long after this," adds the same authority, Bishop Alexander "invited Athanasius to be his commensal and secretary. He had been well educated, and was versed in grammar and rhetoric, and had already, while still a young man, and before reaching the episcopate, given proof to those who dwelt with him of his wisdom and acumen" (Soz., II, xvii). That "wisdom and acumen" manifested themselves in a varied environment. While still a deacon under Alexander's care, he seems to have been brought for a while into close relations with some of the solitaries of the Egyptian desert, and in particular with the Anthony the Great, whose life he is said to have written.

===Opposition to Arianism===

In about 319, when Athanasius was a deacon, a presbyter named Arius came into a direct conflict with Alexander of Alexandria. It appears that Arius reproached Alexander for what he felt were misguided or heretical teachings being taught by the bishop. Kannengiesser, Charles, “Alexander and Arius of Alexandria: The last Ante-Nicene theologians”, Miscelanea En Homenaje Al P. Antonio Orbe Compostellanum Vol. XXXV, no. 1-2. (Santiago de Compostela, 1990),398 Arius’ theological views appear to have been firmly rooted in Alexandrian Christianity, and his Christological views were certainly not radical at all. Williams, Rowan, Arius: Heresy and Tradition (London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 1987),175 He embraced a subordinationist Christology (that God did not have a beginning, but the Logos did), heavily influenced by Alexandrian thinkers like Origen, Williams, 175 which was a common Christological view in Alexandria at the time. Williams 154-155 Support for Arius from powerful bishops like Eusebius of Caesarea Arius letter to Eusebius of Nicomedia and Eusebius of Nicomedia, Alexander of Alexandria's Catholic Epistle further illustrate how Arius' subordinationist Christology was shared by other Christians in the Empire. Arius was subsequently excommunicated by Alexander, and he would begin to elicit the support of many bishops who agreed with his position. Athanasius may have accompanied Alexander to the First Council of Nicaea in 325, the council which produced the Nicene Creed and anathematized Arius and his followers. On 9 May 328, Athanasius succeeded Alexander as bishop of Alexandria. As a result of rises and falls in Arianism's influence after the First Council of Nicaea, Emperor Constantine I banished him from Alexandria to Trier in the Rhineland, but he was restored after the death of Constantine I by the emperor's son Constantine II. In 339, he was banished once again. This time he went to Rome, and spent seven years there before returning to Alexandria. The years from 346 through 356 were a relatively peaceful period for Athanasius, and some of his most important writings were composed during this period. Unfortunately, the emperor Constantius II seems to have been committed to having Athanasius deposed, and went so far as to send soldiers to arrest him. Athanasius went into hiding in the desert with the Desert Fathers, and continued in his capacity as bishop from there until the death of Constantius II in 361.

At the Alexandrian Council of 326, Athanasius was elected to succeed the aged Alexander, and various heresies and schisms of Egypt were denounced. In 340, one hundred bishops met at Alexandria, declared in favor of Athanasius, and vigorously rejected the criticisms of the Eusebian faction at Tyre. At a council in 350, Athanasius was replaced in his see. In 362 was held one of the most important of these councils. It was presided over by Athanasius and Eusebius of Vercelli, and was directed against those who denied the divinity of the Holy Spirit, the human soul of Christ, and Christ's divinity. Mild measures were agreed on for those heretic bishops who repented, but severe penance was decreed for the chief leaders of the major heresies.

In 363, another council met under Athanasius for the purpose of submitting to the new Roman Emperor Jovian an account of the true faith. Somewhat similar was the purpose of the Council of 364. 

There were two more brief periods when Athanasius was exiled. In the spring of 365, after the accession of Emperor Valens to the throne, troubles again arose. Athanasius was once more compelled to seek safety from his persecutors in concealment (October 365), which lasted, however, only for four months.

From 366 he was able to serve as bishop in peace until his death.

Athanasius was restored on at least five separate occasions, perhaps as many as seven. This gave rise to the expression "Athanasius contra mundum" or "Athanasius against the world".

He spent his final years repairing all the damage done during the earlier years of violence, dissent, and exile, and returning to his writing and preaching undisturbed. On 2 May 373, having consecrated Peter II, one of his presbyters as his successor, Athanasius died quietly in his house.

===Writings===
Athanasius spent a good deal of his energy on polemical writings against his theological opponents. Examples include Orations Against the Arians, his defence of the divinity of the Holy Spirit (Letters to Serapion in the 360s, and On the Holy Spirit) against Macedonianism and On the Incarnation.

Arguably his most read work is his biography of Anthony the Great entitled Vita Antonii, or Life of Antony. This biography depicts Anthony as an illiterate and holy man who through his existence in a primordial landscape has an absolute connection to the divine truth, which always is synonymous with that of Athanasius as the biographer. Dag Øistein Endsjø Primordial landscapes, incorruptible bodies. Desert asceticism and the Christian appropriation of Greek ideas on geography, bodies, and immortality. New York: Peter Lang 2008. It later served as an inspiration to Christian monastics in both the East and the West. The so-called Athanasian Creed dates from well after Athanasius's death and draws upon the phraseology of Augustine's De trinitate.

In Coptic literature, St. Athanasius is the first patriarch of Alexandria to use Coptic as well as Greek in his writings. 

====Quotes from St Athanasius====

He said;

"Jesus that I know as my Redeemer cannot be less than God" ~at the Council of Nicæa (c. 325)

"Both from the confession of the evil spirits and from the daily witness of His works, it is manifest, then, and let none presume to doubt it, that the Savior has raised His own body, and that He is very Son of God, having His being from God as from a Father, Whose Word and Wisdom and Whose Power He is. He it is Who in these latter days assumed a body for the salvation of us all, and taught the world concerning the Father. He it is Who has destroyed death and freely graced us all with incorruption through the promise of the resurrection, having raised His own body as its first-fruits, and displayed it by the sign of the cross as the monument to His victory over death and its corruption". - The Incarnation of the Word, Chapter 5, The Resurrection (5:32)

"But for the searching and right understanding of the Scriptures there is need of a good life and a pure soul, and for Christian virtue to guide the mind to grasp, so far as human nature can, the truth concerning God the Word. One cannot possibly understand the teaching of the saints unless one has a pure mind and is trying to imitate their life. Anyone who wants to look at sunlight naturally wipes his eye clear first, in order to make, at any rate, some approximation to the purity of that on which he looks; and a person wishing to see a city or country goes to the place in order to do so. Similarly, anyone who wishes to understand the mind of the sacred writers must first cleanse his own life, and approach the saints by copying their deeds. Thus united to them in the fellowship of life, he will both understand the things revealed to them by God and, thenceforth escaping the peril that threatens sinners in the judgment, will receive that which is laid up for the saints in the kingdom of heaven." ~in his conclusion to The Incarnation of the Word, Chapter 9, (9:57)

"These are fountains of salvation that they who thirst may be satisfied with the living words they contain. In these alone is proclaimed the doctrine of godliness. Let no man add to these, neither let him take out from these. For concerning these, the Lord put to shame the Sadducees, and said, 'Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures' and He reproved the Jews, saying, 'Search the Scriptures, for these are they that testify of ME". ~describing the canon in his 39th Festal Letter (c.367)

"The Son of God became man so that we might become God." Later echoed by Thomas Aquinas Later echoed by Witness Lee 

===New Testament canon===

St Athanasius is also the first person to identify the same 27 books of the New Testament that are in use today. Up until then, various similar lists of works to be read in churches were in use. A milestone in the evolution of the canon of New Testament books is his Easter letter from Alexandria, written in 367, usually referred to as his 39th Festal Letter. Pope Damasus I, the Bishop of Rome in 382, promulgated a list of books which contained a New Testament canon identical to that of Athanasius. A synod in Hippo in 393 repeated Athanasius' and Damasus' New Testament list (without the Epistle to the Hebrews), and a synod in Carthage in 397 repeated Athanasius' and Damasus' complete New Testament list.

Scholars have debated whether Athanasius' list in 367 was the basis for the later lists. Because Athanasius' canon is the closest canon of any of the Church Fathers to the canon used by Protestant churches today, many Protestants point to Athanasius as the father of the canon. They are identical except that Athanasius includes the Book of Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah and places the Book of Esther among the "7 books not in the canon but to be read" along with the Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), Judith, Tobit, the Didache, and the Shepherd of Hermas. Excerpt from Letter 39 See the article, Biblical canon, for more details.

==Recent Opinions==
Statue of the saint in St Athanasius' Roman Catholic Church in Evanston, Illinois.
There are at present two completely opposite views about the personality of Athanasius. While some scholars praise him as an orthodox saint with great character, others see him as a power-hungry politician who employed questionable ecclesiastical tactics.

===Critics of Athanasius===
Richard E. Rubenstein and Timothy Barnes have painted a less than flattering picture of the saint. They argue that his ascension to the station of bishop in Alexandria occurred under questionable circumstances. Upon the death of his predecessor Alexander in 328, more than fifty bishops gathered to choose a new leader to the Alexandrian see. While Alexander had been priming Athanasius to assume the bishopric after his death, it is said, he was not unanimously supported, and questions of his age (the minimum age to become a bishop was thirty, and questions remain to this day whether he was yet that old). Having less than overwhelming support as well did not help his candidacy. According to recent academics, Athanasius, growing impatient, took a small number of bishops who supported his claim, and held a private consecration making him bishop. Rubenstein, Richard E., When Jesus Became God: The Epic Fight over Christ’s Divinity in the Last Days of Rome (New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1999), 105-106 

Throughout most of his career, Athanasius had many detractors. There were allegations of defiling an altar, selling Church grain that had been meant to feed the poor for his own personal gain, and for suppressing dissent through violence and murder. Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1993),37 It cannot be claimed, beyond all doubt, whether any or all of these specific allegations were true, but Rubenstein suggests that Athanasius employed a level of force when it suited his cause or personal interests. Rubenstein,106 

===Supporters of Athanasius===
However, there are also many modern historians who object to this view and point out that such a hostile attitude towards Athanasius is based on an unfair judgment of historical sources. Arnold, 24-99; Ng, 273-292. Many Christian denominations revere Athanasius as a saint, teacher, and father. They cite his defense of the Christology described in the first chapter of the Gospel of John ("In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God" (John 1:1,2)) and his significant theological works (C.S. Lewis calls his De Incarnatione a "masterpiece") Introduction to St. Athanasius on the Incarnation. Translated and edited by Sister Penelope Lawson, published by Mowbray 1944. p.9 as evidence of his righteousness. They also emphasize his close relationship with St Anthony, who is almost universally revered throughout Christendom.

St Gregory Nazianzen, 330-390, begins Or. 21 with: "When I praise Athanasius, virtue itself is my theme: for I name every virtue as often as I mention him who was possessed of all virtues. He was the true pillar of the church. His life and conduct were the rule of bishops, and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith." 

St Cyril of Alexandria, 370-444, In the first letter says: "Athanasius is one who can be trusted: he would not say anything that is not in accord with sacred scripture." (Ep 1).

St Pius X said in a letter to philosopher-friend and correspondent in the closing years of his life, (Epist. lxxi, ad Max.): "Let what was confessed by the fathers of Nicaea prevail". 

===Anti-Arianism===
Athanasius presented his opponents, the Arians, as a cohesive group that backed Arius’ views and followed him as a leader. It is now accepted by most scholars that the Arian Party was not a monolithic group, Haas, Christopher, “The Arians of Alexandria”, Vigiliae Christianae Vol. 47, no. 3 (1993), 239 holding drastically different theological views that spanned the early Christian theological spectrum. Chadwick, Henry, “Faith and Order at the Council of Nicaea”, Harvard Theological Review LIII (Cambridge Mass: 1960),173 Williams, 63 Kannengiesser "Alexander and Arius", 403 They supported the tenets of Origenist thought and theology, Kannengiesser, “Athanasius of Alexandria vs. Arius: The Alexandrian Crisis”, in The Roots of Egyptian Christianity (Studies in Antiquity and Christianity), ed. Birger A. Pearson and James E. Goehring (1986),208 but had little else in common. The term Arian was first coined by Athanasius to describe both followers of Arius, and followers of ideas that he deemed as bad as Arius'. Athanasius used the term Arian to describe many of his opponents, except for Miletians. Barnes "Athanasius and Constantius",135 He used the term in a derogatory fashion to chide Arius’ supporters Barnes "Athanasius and Constantius",14 who did not see themselves as followers of Arius. Williams, 82 As stated by Timothy Barnes, Athanasius used “invented dialogue to ridicule his adversaries”, and used “suppression and distortion” to serve his own means. Barnes "Athanasius and Constantius",128 He often blamed charges and accusations leveled at him on “Arian madmen” who he claimed conspired to destroy him and Christianity. The Arian party, as described by Athanasius, may not have existed in the form he portrayed in his writings. Some argue that the view of Arianism that exists to this day among most Christians would not have existed were it not for Athanasius. However, others point to the Council of Nicaea as proof in and of itself that Arianism was a real theological ideology. While Athanasius may have affected the general perception of Arianism, they say, his portrayal was polemical, not creative.

==See also==
*Creed
*First Council of Nicaea
*Nicene Creed
*Apostles' Creed
*Athanasian Creed
*Shield of the Trinity
*Orthodox Church
*Eastern Catholic Church
*St. Athanasius' Church (disambiguation), various churches named after Athanasius

==References==
;General
*
;Specific

==Further reading==
* Arnold, Duane W.-H., The Early Episcopal Career of Athanasius of Alexandria (1991)
* Alexander of Alexandria "Catholic Epistle", The Ecole Initiative, http://ecole.evansville.edu/arians/alex1.htm
* Arius, “Arius’ letter to Eusebius of Nicomedia”, Ecclesiastical History, ed. Theodoret. Ser. 2, Vol. 3, 41, The Ecole Initiative, http://ecole.evansville.edu/arians/arius1.htm
*Attwater, Donald and Catherine Rachel John. The Penguin Dictionary of Saints. 3rd edition. (New York: Penguin, 1993). ISBN 0-140-51312-4.
* Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993).
* Barnes, Timothy D., Constantine and Eusebius (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981)
* 
* Brakke, David. Athanasius and the Politics of Asceticism (1995)
* Clifford, Cornelius, "Athanasius", Catholic Encyclipedia Vol. 2 (1930), 35-40
* Chadwick, Henry, “Faith and Order at the Council of Nicaea”, Harvard Theological Review LIII (Cambridge Mass: Harvard University Press, 1960), 171-195.
*Endsjø, Dag Øistein. Primordial landscapes, incorruptible bodies. Desert asceticism and the Christian appropriation of Greek ideas on geography, bodies, and immortality. (New York: Peter Lang, 2008)
* Ernest, James D., The Bible in Athanasius of Alexandria (Leiden: Brill, 2004).
* Haas, Christopher “The Arians of Alexandria”, Vigiliae Christianae Vol. 47, no. 3 (1993), 234-245.
* Hanson, R.P.C., The Search for the Christian Doctrine of God: The Arian Controversy, 318-381 (T.&T. Clark 1988)
* Kannengiesser, Charles, “Alexander and Arius of Alexandria: The last Ante-Nicene theologians”, Miscelanea En Homenaje Al P. Antonio Orbe Compostellanum Vol. XXXV, no. 1-2. (Santiago de Compostela, 1990), 391-403.
* Kannengiesser, Charles “Athanasius of Alexandria vs. Arius: The Alexandrian Crisis”, in The Roots of Egyptian Christianity (Studies in Antiquity and Christianity), ed. Birger A. Pearson and James E. Goehring (1986), 204-215.
* Ng, Nathan K. K., The Spirituality of Athanasius (1991)
*
* Rubenstein, Richard E., When Jesus Became God: The Epic Fight over Christ’s Divinity in the Last Days of Rome (New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1999).
*
*
* Williams, Rowan: "Arius, Heresy and Tradition": (London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 1987).

==External links==

*Saint Athanasius by F. A. Forbes
* The Coptic Synexarion commemorating the departure of St. Athanasius the Apostolic (7 Bashans, 89 A.M.)
* Athanasius Bibliography from University of Erlangen (German)
* Archibald Robinson, Athanasius: Select Letters and Works (Edinburgh 1885)
* The so-called Athanasian Creed (not written by Athanasius, see Athanasian Creed above)
* Athanasius Select Resources, Bilingual Anthology (in Greek original and English)
* Two audio lectures about Athanasius on the Deity of Christ, Dr N Needham
* Concorida Cyclopedia: Athanasius
* Christian Cyclopedia: Athanasius
* Catholic Encyclopedia: Athanasius
* Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes
* St Athanasius the Great the Archbishop of Alexandria Orthodox icon and synaxarion
* English Key to Athanasius Werke
* The Writings of Athanasius in Chronological Order
* On the Incarnation by Athanasius of Alexandria, on www.theologynetwork.org
* Letters to Serapion (on the Holy Spirit) at archive.org
* Introducing...Athanasius audio resource by Dr. Michael Reeves. Two lectures on www.theologynetwork.org



[[Azores]]

The Archipelago of the Azores ( , ; , ) is composed of nine volcanic islands situated in the middle of the North Atlantic Ocean, and is located about west from Lisbon and about east from the east coast of North America. The islands, and their economic exclusion zone, form the Autonomous Region of the Azores, one of the two autonomous regions of Portugal. Its main industries are: agriculture, dairy farming (for cheese and butter products primarily), minor livestock ranching, fishing and tourism, which is becoming the major service activity in the region; added to which, the government of the Azores employs a large percentage of the population directly or indirectly in many aspects of the service and tertiary sectors.

There are nine major Azorean islands and an islet cluster, in three main groups. These are Flores and Corvo, to the west; Graciosa, Terceira, São Jorge, Pico and Faial in the centre; and São Miguel, Santa Maria and the Formigas Reef to the east. They extend for more than and lie in a northwest-southeast direction.
The vast extent of the islands defines an immense exclusive economic zone of . The westernmost point of this area is from the North American continent. All the islands have volcanic origins, although some, such as Santa Maria, have had no recorded activity since the islands were settled. Mount Pico, on the island of Pico, is the highest point in Portugal, at . The Azores are actually some of the tallest mountains on the planet, measured from their base at the bottom of the ocean to their peaks, which thrust high above the surface of the Atlantic.

Because these once-uninhabited and remote islands were settled sporadically over a span of two centuries, their culture, dialect, cuisine and traditions vary considerably.

==History==

A small number of alleged Hypogea, earthen structures carved into rocks that were used for burials, have been identified on the islands of Corvo, Santa Maria and Terceira by Portuguese archaeologist Nuno Ribeiro and speculations were published that they might date back 2000 years, alluding to a human presence on the island before the Portuguese. However, these kind of structures have always been used in the Azores to store cereals and suggestions by Ribeiro that they might be burial sites are unconfirmed. Detailed examination and dating to authenticate the validity of these speculations is lacking. So far, it is unclear whether these structures are natural or man-made and if they predate the 15th century Portuguese colonization of the Azores. Solid confirmation of a pre-Portuguese human presence in the archipelago has not yet been published.

===Exploration and rediscovery===
1584 map of the Azores.
The discovery and settlement of the Azores archipelago, much like the islands of Madeira, is one of the more controversial aspects of the Portuguese Age of Discovery. In addition to many theories, myths and stories written about the Azores there have been various Genovese and Catalan maps produced since 1351 that identified islands in the Atlantic. Some chroniclers note that sailors knew of the islands, and visited them during return voyages from the Canary Islands (about 1340–1345), during the reign of King Afonso IV. In "A History of the Azores" by Thomas Ashe written in 1813 the author identified a Fleming, Joshua Vander Berg of Bruges, who made land in the archipelago during a storm on his way to Lisbon. Ashe then claimed that the Portuguese explored the area and claimed it for Portugal shortly after. Other stories note the discovery of the first islands (São Miguel Island, Santa Maria Island and Terceira Island) were made by sailors in the service of Infante D. Henrique, although there are few written documents to support the claims. Supporting the official history of the islands are latter day writings, based on oral tradition, that appeared in the first half of the 15th century. Legends and myths also developed during pre-official history to include myths about Prester John, the "Ilhas Afortunadas" (the Fortunate Isles), the "Ilhas Azuis" (the Blue Islands), the "Ilhas Cassiterides" (the islands of Tin and Silver) or "Ilhas de Sete Cidades" (the islands of the Seven Cities), all noting the knowledge of undiscovered lands in the middle of the Atlantic.

Officially, the first islands were "discovered" in the 15th century (in 1431) by Gonçalo Velho Cabral a Captain in the service of Infante D. Henrique, though credit is also given to the explorer Diogo de Silves (in 1427).

Although it is commonly said that the archipelago received its name for the goshawk ( in Portuguese) due to its being a common bird at the time of discovery, it is unlikely that the bird nested or hunted in the islands. Some people, however, insist that the name is derived from birds, pointing to a local subspecies of the buzzard () as the animal the first explorers erroneously identified as goshawks. The name may also derive from the word azor, meaning blue in vernacular Portuguese and used by those sailors who identified the islands by their blue color as they appeared in the distance by sea. The proper word for blue in Portuguese is azul.

===Settlement===
Angra do Heroísmo, the oldest continuously-settled town in the archipelago of the Azores and UNESCO World Heritage Site
At some point, following the discovery of Santa Maria, sheep were let loose on the island before settlement actually took place. This was done to supply the future settlers with food because there were no large animals on the island. Settlement did not take place right away, however. There was not much interest among the Portuguese people in an isolated archipelago hundreds of miles from civilization. But patiently Cabral gathered resources and settlers for the next three years (1433–1436) and sailed to establish colonies on Santa Maria first and then later on São Miguel.

Brush had to be cleared and rocks removed for the planting of crops; grain, grape vines, sugar cane, and other plants suitable for settler use and of commercial value, were planted. Domesticated animals were brought, such as chickens, rabbits, cattle, sheep, goats, and hogs. Houses were built and villages established.

The islands were settled by a mixed group of people from the Portuguese provinces of Algarve and Minho. Also, Madeirans, Moorish prisoners, enslaved Africans, French, Italians, Scots, English, Germans and Flemings were among the early settlers. There were petty criminals, Spanish clergy, Sephardic Jews, soldiers, government officials, European merchants and sugar cane growers.

São Miguel was first settled in 1444, the settlers – mainly from the Estremadura, Alto Alentejo and Algarve areas of Portugal, under the command of Gonçalo Velho Cabral – landing at the site of modern-day Povoação. In 1522 Vila Franca do Campo, then the capital of the island, was devastated by a landslide caused by an earthquake which killed about 5,000 people, and the capital was moved to Ponta Delgada. The town of Vila Franca was rebuilt on the original site and today is a thriving fishing and yachting port. Ponta Delgada received its city status in 1546. Since the first settlement the pioneers applied themselves to the area of agriculture. By the 15th century Graciosa exported wheat, barley, wine and brandy. The goods were sent to Terceira largely due to the proximity of the island.

During the 18th and 19th century, Graciosa was host to many prominent figures, including Chateaubriand, the French writer who passed through upon his escape to America during the French revolution; Almeida Garrett, the Portuguese poet who visited an uncle and wrote some poetry while there; and Prince Albert of Monaco, the 19th century oceanographer who led several expeditions in the waters of the Azores. He arrived on his yacht "Hirondelle", and visited the "furna da caldeira", the noted hot springs grotto.

The first reference to the island of São Jorge was made in 1439 but the actual date of discovery is unknown. In 1443 the island was already inhabited but active settlement only began with the arrival of the noble Flemish native Wilhelm Van der Haegen. Arriving at Topo, where he lived and died, he became known as Guilherme da Silveira to the islanders. João Vaz Corte-Real received the captaincy of the island in 1483. Velas became a town before the end of the 15th century. By 1490, there were 2,000 Flemings living in the islands of Terceira, Pico, Faial, São Jorge and Flores. Because there was such a large Flemish settlement, the Azores became known as the Flemish Islands or the Isles of Flanders. Prince Henry the Navigator was responsible for this settlement. His sister, Isabel, was married to Duke Philip of Burgundy of which Flanders was a part. There was a revolt against Philip's rule and disease and hunger became rampant. Isabel appealed to Henry to allow some of the unruly Flemings to settle in the Azores. He granted this and supplied them with the necessary transportation and goods.

The settlement of the then-unoccupied islands started in 1439 with people mainly from the continental provinces of Algarve and Alentejo. In 1583, Philip II of Spain, as king of Portugal, sent his fleet to clear the Azores of a combined multinational force of adventurers, mercenaries, volunteers and soldiers who were attempting to establish the Azores as a staging post for a rival pretender to the Portuguese throne. Following the success of his fleet at the Battle of Ponta Delgada, the captured enemies were hanged from yardarms, as they were considered pirates by Philip II. (This was added to the "Black Legend" by his enemies.) An English expedition against the Azores in 1597, the Islands Voyage, also failed. Spain held the Azores in what is called The Babylonian captivity of 1580–1642. Into the late 16th century, the Azores as well as Madeira began to face problems of overpopulation. Spawning from that particular economic problem, some of the people began to emigrate to Brazil. 

===Iberian Union===
The Azores were the last part of the Portuguese Empire to resist Philip's reign over Portugal (Macau resisted any official recognition) and were returned to Portuguese control with the end of the Iberian Union in 1640, not by the professional military, who were used in the Restoration War in the mainland, but by local people attacking a fortified Castilian garrison.

===Liberal Wars===

The Portuguese Civil War (1828–1834) had strong repercussions in the Azores. In 1829, in Praia da Vitoria, the Liberals won over the absolutists, making Terceira Island the main headquarters of the new Portuguese regime and also where the Council of Regency () of Maria II of Portugal was established.

Beginning in 1868, Portugal issued its stamps overprinted with "" for use in the islands. Between 1892 and 1906, it also issued separate stamps for the three administrative districts of the time.

From 1836 to 1976, the archipelago was divided into three districts, equivalent (except in area) to those in the Portuguese mainland. The division was arbitrary, and did not follow the natural island groups, rather reflecting the location of each district capital on the three main cities (none of which were on the western group).

*Angra do Heroísmo consisted of Terceira, São Jorge, and Graciosa, with the capital at Angra do Heroísmo on Terceira.
*Horta consisted of Pico, Faial, Flores, and Corvo, with the capital at Horta on Faial.
*Ponta Delgada consisted of São Miguel and Santa Maria, with the capital at Ponta Delgada on São Miguel.

===20th century===
In 1931 the Azores (together with Madeira and Portuguese Guinea) revolted against the Ditadura Nacional and were held briefly by military rebels. 

In 1943, during World War II, Portuguese dictator António de Oliveira Salazar leased bases in the Azores to the British, despite his previous collaboration with Germany. The occupation of these facilities in October 1943 was codenamed Operation Alacrity by the Allies. This was a key turning point in the Battle of the Atlantic, allowing the Allies to provide aerial coverage in the Mid-Atlantic gap; helping them to hunt U-boats and protect convoys.

In 1944, American forces constructed a small and short-lived air base on the island of Santa Maria. In 1945, a new base was constructed on the island of Terceira and is currently known as Lajes Field. This base is in an area called Lajes, a broad, flat sea terrace that had been a farm. Lajes Field is a plateau rising out of the sea on the northeast corner of the island. This air base is a joint American and Portuguese venture. Lajes Field continues to support United States and Portuguese military operations. During the Cold War, the United States Navy P-3 Orion anti-submarine squadrons patrolled the North Atlantic for Soviet submarines and surface spy vessels. Since its inception, Lajes Field has been used for refuelling aircraft bound for Europe, and more recently, the Middle East. The United States Navy operates a small fleet of military ships in the harbour of Praia da Vitória, three kilometres (2 mi) southeast of Lajes Field. The airfield also has a small commercial terminal handling scheduled and chartered passenger flights from other islands in the archipelago, Europe, and North America.

In 1976, the Azores became the Autonomous Region of the Azores (), one of the Autonomous regions of Portugal, and the Azorean districts were suppressed.

==Geography==
Map of the Azores

===Physical geography===
The archipelago of the Azores is located in the middle of the northern hemisphere of the Atlantic Ocean and extends along a west-northwest to east-southeast orientation (between 36.5°–40° North latitudes and 24.5°–31.5° West longitudes) in an area approximately 600 km wide. The islands of the Azores emerged from what is called the Azores Platform, a 5.8 million km² region that is morphologically accented by a depth of 2000 meters. Miranda, et.al., 1998 Machado, et.al., 2008, p.14 

From a geostructural perspective the Azores is located above an active triple junction between three of the world's large tectonic plates (the North American Plate, the Eurasian Plate and the African Plate), a condition that has translated into the existence of many faults and fractures in this region of the Atlantic . Lúis, 1994, p.439–440 The westernmost islands of the archipelago (Corvo and Flores) are located in the North American Plate, while the remaining islands are located within the boundary that divides the Eurasian and African Plates.

 +Surface areas of the islands of the archipelago Island Area km2 sq mi São Miguel Pico Terceira São Jorge Faial Flores Santa Maria Graciosa Corvo 

On the island of Pico, Mount Pico, the highest mountain/summit in the Azores and Portugal, as seen from the island of Faial
Volcanic crater lake, Lagoa das Sete Cidades, on the island of São Miguel

The principal tectonic structures that exist in the region of the Azores are the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the Terceira Rift, the Azores Fracture Zone and the Glória Fault. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is the main frontier between the American Plate and the African-Eurasian Plates that crosses the Azores Platform between the islands of Flores and Faial from north to south then to the southwest; it is an extensive form crossed by many transform faults running perpendicular to its north-south orientation, that is seismically active and susceptible to volcanism. The Terceira Rift is a system of fractures that extends from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge to the Glória Fault that represents the main frontier between the Eurasian and African Plates. It is defined by a line of submarine volcanoes and island mounts that extend northwest to southeast for about 550 km, from the area west of Graciosa until the islets of the Formigas, that includes the islands of Graciosa, Terceira and São Miguel. Its northwest limit connects to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, while the southeast section intersects the Gloria Fault southeast of the island of Santa Maria. The Azores Fracture Zone is that extends from the Glória Fault and encompasses a relatively inactive area to the south of the islands of the Central and Eastern groups north to the Terceira Rift, along a 45° angle. The Glória Fault, for its part, extends 800 km along a linear line from the Azores to the Azores-Gibraltar Transform Fault. Madeira, 1998 

The island's volcanism is associated with the rifting along the Azores Triple Junction; the spread of the crust along the existing faults and fractures has produced many of the active volcanic and seismic events, Ferreira, 2005, p.4 while supported by buoyant upwelling in the deeper mantle, some associate with an Azores hotspot. Ting Yang, et.al., 2006, p.20 Most of the volcanic activity has centered, primarily, along the Terceira Rift. From the beginning of the island's settlement, around the 15th Century, there have been 28 registered volcanic eruptions (15 terrestrial and 13 submarine). The last significant volcanic eruption, the Capelinhos volcano (), occurred off the coast of the island of Faial (in 1957); the most recent volcanic activity occurred in the seamounts and submarine volcanoes off the coast of Serreta and in the Pico-Jão Jorge Channel. ; Evidence for the submarine eruptions off the coasts of Velas, São Jorge Island and Cachorro, Santa Luzia, Pico Island included primarily from inferences and eyewitness testimonies about sulfuric gases and vapors released from the waters along the coast (February 15–24, 1964 and December 15, 1963, respectively) The islands have many examples of volcano-built geomorphology, including: many of the caves and subterranean lava tubes (such as the Gruta das Torres, Algar do Carvão, Gruta do Natal, Gruta das Cinco Ribeiras), the coastal lava fields (like the coast of Feteiras, Faial, the Mistério of Prainha or São João on Pico Island) in addition to the currently inactive cones in central São Miguel Island, the aforementioned Capelinhos on Faial, the volcanic complexes of Terceira or Plinian caldeira of Corvo Island.

The islands of the archipelago were formed through volcanic and seismic activity during the late Tertiary geological period; the first embryonic surfaces started to appear in the waters of Santa Maria during the Miocene epoch (from circa 8 million years ago). The sequence of the island formation has been generally characterized as: Santa Maria (8.12 Ma), São Miguel (4.1 Ma), Terceira (3.52 Ma), Graciosa (2.5 Ma), Flores (2.16 Ma), Faial (0.7 Ma), São Jorge (0.55 Ma), Corvo (0.7 Ma) and the youngest, Pico (0.27 Ma). Carine, 2010, p.78 Although all islands have experienced volcanism during their geological history, within recorded "human settlement" history the islands of Santa Maria, Flores, Corvo and Graciosa have not experienced any volcanic eruptions; in addition to active fumaroles and hot-springs, the remaining islands have had sporadic eruptions since the 14th Century. Apart from the Capelinhos volcano in 1957–58, the last recorded instance of "island formation" occurred off the coast of São Miguel, when the island of Sabrina was briefly formed.

Owing to its geodynamic environment, the region has been center of intense seismic activity, particularly along its tectonic boundaries on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and Terceira Rift. Seismic events although frequent, usually tectonic or vulco-tectonic in nature, but in general low to medium intensities, occasionally punctuated by events of level 5 or greater on the Richter scale. Ferreira, 2005, p.110 The most severe earthquake was registered in 1757, near Calheta on the island of São Jorge, which exceeded 7 on the Richter scale. In comparison, the 1522 earthquake, mentioned by Gaspar Frutuoso the historian, was only a magnitude 6.8, but a level 10 on the Mercalli scale, Ferreira, 2005, p.111 but responsible for the destruction of Vila Franca do Campo and landslides that may have killed less than 5000 of the inhabitants.

The nine islands that comprise the archipelago occupy a surface area of , that includes both the main islands and many islets located in their vicinities. Each of the islands have their own distinct geomorphological characteristics that make them unique: Corvo (the smallest island) is a crater of a major Plinian eruption; Flores (its neighbor on the North American Plate) is a rugged island carved by many valleys and escarpments; Faial characterized for its shield volcano and caldera (Cabeço Gordo); Pico, is the highest point, at , in the Azores and continental Portugal; Graciosa is known for its active Furnas do Enxofre and mixture of volcanic cones and plains; São Jorge is a long slender island, formed from fissural eruptions over thousands of years; Terceira, almost circular, is the location of one of the largest craters in the region; São Miguel is the largest island, and is pitted with many large craters and fields of spatter cones; and Santa Maria, the oldest island, is heavily eroded, being one of the few places to encounter brown sandy beaches in the archipelago. They range in surface area from the largest, São Miguel, at to the smallest, Corvo, at approximately .

These islands have naturally evolved into three recognizable groups located within the Azores Platform; they are:
* The Eastern Group () of São Miguel, Santa Maria and Formigas Islets
* The Central Group () of Terceira, Graciosa, São Jorge, Pico and Faial
* The Western Group () of Flores and Corvo.
In addition, several sub-surface reefs (particularly the Dollabarat on the fringe of the Formigas), banks (specifically the Princess Alice Bank and D. João de Castro Bank, as well as many hydrothermal vents and sea-mounts are monitored by the regional authorities, owing to the complex geotectonic and socio-economic significance within the economic exclusion zone of the archipelago.

===Biome===
The archipelago lies in the Palearctic ecozone, forming a unique biome that includes the macaronesian subtropical laurissilva, with many endemic species of plants. Even though the Azores look very green and sometimes wild, the vegetation has been extremely altered. Approximately 95% of laurisilva has been wiped out in the past 600 years for its valuable wood (for tools, buildings, boats, fire wood, and so on.) and to clear land for agriculture. As a result, it is estimated that more than half of insects on the islands have disappeared or will become extinct. Many cultivated places (which are traditionally dedicated to pasture or to growing colocasia, potatoes, maize and other crops) have now been abandoned, especially as a result of emigration. Consequently, some invasive plants have filled these deserted and disturbed lands. The two most common of these alien species are Pittosporum undulatum and Acacia melanoxylon. They are usually restricted to ancient agricultural land and only rarely penetrate into undisturbed native vegetation. The main loss is in the lowlands (below 400 metres), where virtually all laurisilva was eradicated.

A few Persea indica and Picconia azorica still survive in some places, but appear to be extremely vulnerable. Only Myrica faya seems to have survived human impact quite well, and it is commonly found in hedges or among exotic trees. More recent introductions could become a serious threat, like Leptospermum scoparium which has the ability to colonize the still nearly untouched medium-altitude vegetation (Ilex, Myrsine africana, Erica, and so on.).

Hydrangeas are another potential pest, but their threat is less serious. Notwithstanding the fact that Hydrangeas were introduced from America or Asia, some locals consider them to be a symbol of the archipelago and propagate them along roadsides, helping them to escape into the wild. Cryptomeria, the Japanese cedar, is a conifer extensively grown for its timber; many seedlings can be found in the last remnants of medium-altitude native vegetation.

The Azores has two endemic bird species. The Azores Bullfinch, or Priolo, is restricted to remnant laurisilva forest in the mountains at the eastern end of São Miguel, and is classified by BirdLife International as endangered. Monteiro's Storm-petrel, described to science as recently as 2008, is known to breed in just two locations in the islands, but may occur more widely. The Azores also has an endemic bat, the Azores Noctule, which is unusual in regularly feeding during the day.

The islets of the Formigas (the Portuguese word for "ants"), including the area known as the Dollabarat Reef, has a rich environment of maritime species, such as black coral and manta rays, sharks, and sea turtles. On São Miguel there are notable micro-habitats formed by hot springs that host extremophile microorganisms. 

===Climate===
The archipelago is spread out in the area between 37° N and the parallels of latitude that pass through the Lisbon area (38° 43' / 38° 55' N), giving it generally a tepid, oceanic, subtropical climate, with mild annual oscillations. Daily maximum temperatures usually range between and . The average annual rainfall increases from east to west, and it ranges from 700 to 1600 annual millimetres (27.6–63 in) on average, reaching on Mount Pico, the highest Portuguese mountain at . The Azores high, an area of high atmospheric pressure, is named after the islands.

In addition, the Instituto de Meteorologia has identified the following weather extremes:
* Highest minimum air temperature: , in Angra do Heroísmo, Terceira (30/06/1996)
* Lowest minimum air temperature: , in Chã das Lagoinhos, São Miguel (02/01/1973)
* Highest maximum air temperature: , in Madalena, Pico (07/09/1985)
* Lowest maximum air temperature: , Chã das Lagoinhas, São Miguel (20/02/1972)
* Maximum precipitation in 24 hours: , Furnas, São Miguel (03/10/1974)
* Maximum wind speed: >168 km/hour, Angra do Heroísmo, (Terceira 02/11/1995) Maximum wind speed recorded during Hurricane Tanya (1995), Institute of Meteorology, IP Portugal 

===Human geography===
The Azores are divided into 19 municipalities (); each municipality is further divided into parishes (), of which there is a total of 156 in all of the Azores. The municipalities, by island, are:

 Island Group Population Local Administrative Units Main Settlement 2002 % Total No Municipalities (Concelho) 
 São Miguel Eastern 130,154 54.50 6 Lagoa, Nordeste, Ponta Delgada, Povoação, Ribeira Grande, Vila Franca do Campo Ponta Delgada 
 Terceira Central 54,996 23.00 2 Angra do Heroísmo, Praia da Vitória Angra do Heroísmo 
 Faial Central 14,934 6.25 1 Horta Horta 
 Pico Central 14,579 6.11 3 Lajes do Pico, Madalena, São Roque do Pico São Roque do Pico 
 São Jorge Central 9,522 3.99 2 Calheta, Velas Velas 
 Santa Maria Eastern 5,490 2.30 1 Vila do Porto Vila do Porto 
 Graciosa Central 4,708 1.97 1 Santa Cruz da Graciosa Santa Cruz da Graciosa 
 Flores Western 3,949 1.65 2 Lajes das Flores, Santa Cruz das Flores Santa Cruz das Flores 
 Corvo Western 435 0.18 1 Vila do Corvo Vila do Corvo 
 Total 238,767 19 

There are five cities (Portuguese: cidades) in the Azores: Ponta Delgada and Ribeira Grande on the island of São Miguel; Angra do Heroísmo and Praia da Vitória on the island of Terceira, and Horta on Faial. Three of these Ponta Delgada, Angra and Horta are considered capital/administrative cities to the regional government: homes to the President (Ponta Delgada), the Judiciary (Angra) and the Regional Assembly (Horta). Angra also serves as the ecclesiastical centre of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Angra.

====Population====
On 31 December 2002, the Azores' population was 238,767 at a density of .

The Azores were uninhabited when Portuguese navigators arrived in the early 15th century; the settlement process was initiated in 1439 with individuals from various regions of mainland Portugal and from Madeira island. Today, the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Azores are an admixture of Portuguese, descendants of 15th century immigrants from Algarve, Alentejo and from Minho, as well as Sephardic Jews, Moorish prisoners, Flemish, French, Spaniards, and other populations who contributed to the successive settlement process of the islands. The nature of the economy dictated that African slavery never became common in the Azores because they were sent to Brazil and the Caribbean, only a few remained in the Azores to help with domestic chores, although the islands sometimes served as a waypoint for ships carrying African slaves. 

=====Genetics=====
Genetic studies (Pacheco et al., 2005; Branco et al., 2006; Branco et al., 2008a, 2008b, 2008c) report high genetic variability and heterogeneity in the Azorean population, as compared with mainland Portugal and other European populations. This high genetic variability may be explained by the history of the settlement of the islands, as well as genetic contributions that occurred during the expansion of trade navigation between Europe, America, and Asia in the 16th and 17th centuries. As in continental Portugal, the most frequent mtDNA haplogroup in the Azores is H (45.2%). After R, Haplogroup J is the second most frequent Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup in the Azores. Y-chromosome Haplogroup J, found in greatest concentration in Southwest Asia, is thought to have originated in the Middle East. Data show that in the Azores this haplogroup is the second most common, with a frequency of 13.4%, twice as high as in mainland Portugal (6.8%; Rosser et al. 2000). The other non-European haplogroups, N3 and E3a, which are prevalent in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, respectively, have been found in the Azores (0.6% and 1.2%, respectively) but not in mainland Portugal.

AZORES GENETIC PROFILE: 

Mtdna profile:
Haplogroup pre-HV = 56% (Middle East, Arabia);
Haplogroup H = 45.2% (Europe);
Haplogroup K = 6.5% (Europe, France, Italy, Spain);
Haplogroup L = 3.4% (Africa);
Haplogroup T = 10.1% (Spain);
Haplogroup U = 16.7% (Scandinavia, Finland, Sweden, Norway, Belgium).

Y-chromosome DNA profile:
Haplogroup E1b1b = 9% (northern Africa, Europe, Spain; the Balkans);
Haplogroup E3a = (Africa, Berbers, Tunisians, Moroccan Arabs);
Haplogroup G = (Europe, Asia, Africa, Middle East, India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia);
Haplogroup I = 5% (Europe, Near East, Caucasus, Central Asia; Bosnia, Herzegovina, Croatia, Dagestan);
Haplogroup I1b = 30.8% (Eurasia, Slavic, Uralic people of Eastern Europe; Lebanese);
Haplogroup I1c = ?% ( ? );
Haplogroup J = 13% (southwestern Arabian Peninsula, north Africa, southern Europe);
Haplogroup N3 = (Scandinavia, northern Europe, Ukraine, Poland, Volga-Ural region);
Haplogroup Q = (Central Asia; the Americas, north Africa, Asia, Europe, Pacific region);
Haplogroup R1b = 61.5% (Europe: southern Portugal, western Norway, Tehuelche Argentina, Belgium, Sweden,
 Denmark, Italy, central Portugal, Vienna Austria, Spanish, Irish); 
Haplogroup R1b3 = 60% (European: Spanish, Catalans, Portuguese, French, Danes, etc.; Irish).

====Diaspora====
Since the 17th century, many Azoreans have emigrated, mainly to Brazil, the United States and Canada. Rhode Island and Southeastern Massachusetts, especially the cities of New Bedford, Bristol, Barrington, Pawtucket, Central Falls, West Warwick, Hudson, River Point, and Fall River have been, and continue to be the primary destination for Azorean emigrants. Northern California was the final destination for many of the Massachusetts immigrants who then moved on to the San Joaquin Valley, especially the city of Turlock, just south of Modesto. The tuna fishing industry drew a significant number of Azoreans to the Point Loma neighborhood of San Diego, in Southern California. Orbach, Michael K. (1977). "Hunters, seamen, and entrepreneurs: the tuna seinermen of San Diego" University of California p.7 In 1919, there were approximately 300,000 people in the Azores while there were 100,000 Azoreans in the United States. "Azorean Migration". Library.csustan.edu. 1997-01-17. From 1961 to 1977, about 150,000 Azoreans immigrated to
the United States. "Azorean Immigration into the United States". Library.csustan.edu. There were an estimated 83,000 Azoreans in California in the 1970s. 

Many Azoreans also moved to Bermuda and pre-U.S. Hawaii. Florianópolis and Porto Alegre in the Southern Region of Brazil were founded by Azoreans, who accounted for over half of Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina's population in the late 18th century. Imigrantes: Açorianos As late as 1870-4 some 46,000 Portuguese emigrated to Brazil and a large proportion were from the Azores. Russell King, John Connell (1999). "Small worlds, global lives: islands and migration". Continuum International Publishing Group. pp.61–65. ISBN 185567548X 

==Politics==

Politically, since 1976, the Azores is an autonomous region integrated within the framework of the Portuguese Republic. It has its own government and autonomous legislature within its own political-administrative statute and organic law. Its governmental organs include: the Legislative Assembly, a unicameral parliament composed of 52 elected deputies, elected by universal suffrage for a four-year term; the Regional Government and Presidency, with parliamentary legitimacy, composed of a President, a Vice-President and seven Regional Secretaries responsible for day-to-day operations. It is represented in the Council of Ministers by a representative appointed by the President of the Republic, which was created during the revision of the constitution of 2004 (which, among other things, removed the older Portuguese representative that was appointed by the President of the Republic, beholden to the Council of State and coincident with the President).

Since becoming a Portuguese autonomous region, the executive branch of the regional authority has been located in Ponta Delgada, the legislative branch in Horta, and the judicial branch in Angra do Heroísmo.

The islands of the archipelago do not have independent status in law, except in electoral law and are governed by 19 municipalities that subdivide the islands. In addition, until the administrative reform of the 19th Century, the following civil parishes had municipal standing: Topo (today integrated into the municipality of Calheta, São Jorge); Praia da Graciosa (today integrated into municipality of Santa Cruz da Graciosa); São Sebastião (today an integral part of the municipality of Angra do Heroísmo); Capelas (now part of the municipality of Ponta Delgada); and Água de Pau (now a civil parish in the municipality of Lagoa). These civil parishes still retain their titles of "vila" in name only, by Regional Legislative Decree n.º 29/2003/A, June 24, 2003; the populations of Capelas and neighbouring parish still protest the change and promote the restoration of their status. The municipalities are also subdivided into several civil parishes, with the exception of Corvo (the only municipality by law without a civil parish, owing to its size).

Azorean politics are dominated by the two largest Portuguese political parties, the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the Socialist Party (PS), the latter holding a majority in the Regional Legislative Assembly. The Democratic and Social Center / People's Party (CDS/PP), the Left Bloc (BE), the Unitarian Democratic Coalition (CDU) and the People's Monarchist Party (PPM) are also represented in the local parliament. Currently, , the Socialist Party (PS) and its leader, Carlos César have a plurality of the seats in the Assembly, and operate the Regional Government. Although the PS dominates the regional politics, the PSD is traditionally popular in city and town council elections.

====International affairs====
In 2003, the Azores saw international attention when United States President George W. Bush, British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Spanish Prime Minister José María Aznar and the Portuguese Prime Minister José Manuel Durão Barroso held a summit there days before the commencement of the Iraq War. CNN.com – Bush speaking in the Azores, March 17, 2003 

==Transport==
===Aviation===

Each of the nine islands has an airfield, although the majority are aerodromes rather than airports. The commercial terminals in Ponta Delgada, Horta, Vila do Porto and Santa Cruz das Flores are operated by ANA – Aeroportos de Portugal, a public entity that oversees the operations of airports across Portugal. The remaining, except for Lajes Field, are operated by the Regional Government. Lajes is a military airbase, as well as commercial airport, and is operated by the Portuguese Armed Forces in conjunction with the United States
*Santa Maria: Santa Maria Airport (LPAZ)
*Sao Miguel: João Paulo II Airport (LPPD)
*Terceira: Lajes Field (LPLA) Lajes Air Base (Portuguese Airforce and United States Air Force)
*Sao Jorge: São Jorge Airport (LPSJ)
*Pico: Pico Airport (LPPI)
*Faial: Horta Airport (LPHR)
*Graciosa: Graciosa Airport (LPGR)
*Flores: Flores Airport (LPFL)
*Corvo: Corvo Airport (LPCR)

===Marine transport===
The Azores has had a long history of water transport to overcome distances and establish inter-community contacts and trade. Consequently, the shipbuilding industry developed in many islands, from small fishing boats, to whaling sloops to larger passenger services. Passenger traffic to the main islands (São Miguel, Santa Maria, Terceira and Faial) began in the 17th century, and between the 18th-19th century, the Pico Yacht controlled the lucrative summer traffic season. 

After 1871, the Insulana Shipping Company was the only entity responsible for regular traffic between the islands (except Corvo), Madeira and the United States. But, cargo and passenger transportation ceased in the 1970s, and the ships sold or converted into tuna fishing boats. For the next 20 years, commercial maritime service between the islands (except between Faial-Pico and Lajes das Flores-Vila do Corvo) ceased. 

Transmaçor (Transportes Marítimos Açorianos, Lda.) was founded on 22 December 1987, resulting from the fusion of Empresa das Lanchas do Pico, Ld, owners of the ships Espalamaca and Calheta (ships that had travelled the canal between Faial and Pico for several years); Empresa Açoreana de Transportes Marítimos, Lda, which operated the ship Terra Alta; and Transcanal (Transportes Marítimos do Canal, Lda.) operator the traditional boats Picaroto and Manuel José. The societies and companies comprise 80% of the capital, with the remaining shares owned by the Azores Regional Government. In the Central Group, the shipping company operates four to six time daily connections between Horta and Madalena throughout the year, using its small fleet of ships (Cruzeiro das Ilhas, Cruzeiro do Canal, Expresso das Ilhas and Expresso do Triângulo), in addition to inter-island connections between Faial, Pico, São Jorge and Terceira during the summer months. 

Meanwhile, new initiatives began in the late 1990s: the catamaran Iapetos began services, followed by Lady of Mann and Golfinho Azul (chartered by Açorline). In 2005, Atlanticoline was established, providing services with the ships Ilha Azul and Express Santorini, later adding the Viking in 2009. 

On 20 June 2011, the Regional Government announced that it would purchase 60% of Transmaçor, equivalent to 500,000 Euros of the company's capital. With this acquisition the Autonomous government of the Azores controlled 88% of the capital, with 12% to shareholders. The signed memorandum of understanding concluded negotiations between the various parties involved, under which the liability of Transmaçor (worth a total of 8 million Euros) was divided equally between the Region and businessman José Almeida, who is the holder of a majority stake in the company. 

Similarly, the Regional Government approved the consolidation of the three individual port authorities (Administração dos Portos do Triângulo e Grupo Ocidental, Administração dos Portos da Terceira e Graciosa and the Administração dos Portos das Ilhas de São Miguel e Santa Maria) and regional Portos dos Açores into one entity that resulted in a 2.2 million Euro cost savings, in addition to a reduction from 11 to three administrators. 

==Culture==
Azoreans have developed their own distinct regional identity and cultural traits, from a combination of continental Portuguese customs brought by various waves of immigration and local political and environmental factors.

Religious festivals, patron saints and traditional holidays mark the Azorean calender. The most important religious events are tied with the festivals associated with the Cult of the Holy Spirit, commonly referred to as the festivals of the Holy Spirit (or Espírito Santo), rooted in millenarian dogma, and held on all islands from May to September. These festivals are very important to the Azorean people, who are primarily Roman Catholic, and combine profane religious rituals with processions celebrating the benevolence and egalitarianism of neighbours. These events are centred around treatros or impérios, small buildings that host the meals, adoration and charity of the participants, and used to store the artefacts associated with the events. On Terceira, for example, these impérios have grown into ornate buildings painted and cared for by the local brotherhoods in their respective parishes. The events are normally closed to the public (confined to the members of the parish brotherhoods), although some limited events have been organized by the tourist-friendly populace, including a public event held by the city government in Ponta Delgada, on the island of São Miguel, which attracts visitors and locals.

Another event, the Festival of Senhor Santo Cristo dos Milagres () in Ponta Delgada on the island of São Miguel is the largest individual religious event in the Azores, and takes place on the fifth Sunday after Easter. Pilgrims from within the Portuguese diaspora normally travel to Ponta Delgada to participate in an afternoon procession behind the image of Christ along the flower-decorated streets of the city. Although the solemn procession is only held on one day, the events of the Festival of Senhor Santo Cristo occur over a period of a week, and involve a ritual of moving the image between the main church and convent nightly, ultimately culminating in the procession, which is televised within the Azores and to the Portuguese diaspora.
The Sanjoaninas Festivities in Angra do Heroísmo in Terceira are held in June honoring S. Antonio, S. Pedro and St. João, in a large religious celebration.

The festival of Nossa Senhora de Lourdes, (Our Lady of Lourdes), patron saint of whalers, begins in Lajes on Pico on the last Sunday the August and runs through the week—Whalers Week. It is marked by social and cultural events connected to the tradition of whale hunting. The Festa das Vindimas, (Wine Harvest Festival), takes place during the first week of September and is a century old custom of the people of Pico.

In Corvo the people celebrate their patron saint Nossa Senhora dos Milagres (Our Lady of Miracles) on August 15 every year in addition to the festivals of the Divine Holy Spirit. The Festival da Maré de Agosto (August Sea Festival), takes place every year beginning on 15 August in Praia Formosa on Santa Maria. Also, the Semana do Mar (Sea Week), dedicated almost exclusively to water sports, takes place in August in the city of Horta, on Faial.

Carnaval is also celebrated in the Azores. Parades and pageants are the heart of the Carnaval festivities. There is lively music, colorful costumes, hand-made masks, and floats.
The traditional bullfights in the bullring are ongoing, as is the running of bulls in the streets.

==See also==

* Canary Islands
* Cape Verde
* Madeira
* Macaronesia
* Postage stamps and postal history of the Azores

==References==
===Notes===

===Sources===
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*
*

==External links==

* 
* www.azores.gov.pt—Website of the Azores Regional Government
* www.azoresweather.com—Azores Weather and Climate
* Acoreanos, the Azores Connection & Online Community

 



[[Outback]]

A tourism sign post Yalgoo, Western Australia

The Dingo Fence near Coober Pedy

Fitzgerald River National Park in Western Australia

The Outback is the vast, remote, arid area of Australia, term colloquially can refer to any lands outside the main urban areas. The term "the outback" is generally used to refer to locations that are comparatively more remote than those areas named "the bush".

==Overview==
The outback is home to a diverse set of animal species, such as the kangaroo, emu and dingo. The Dingo Fence was built to restrict dingo movements into agricultural areas towards the south east of the continent. The marginally fertile parts are primarily utilised as rangelands and have been traditionally used for sheep or cattle grazing, on cattle stations which are leased from the Federal Government. While small areas of the outback consist of clay soils the majority has exceedingly infertile palaeosols. Riversleigh, in Queensland, is one of Australia's most renowned fossil sites and was recorded as a World Heritage site in 1994. The area contains fossil remains of ancient mammals, birds and reptiles of Oligocene and Miocene age.

==History==

Early European exploration of inland Australia was sporadic. More focus was on the more accessible and fertile coastal areas. The first party to successfully cross the Blue Mountains just outside Sydney was led by Gregory Blaxland in 1813, 25 years after the colony was established. People starting with John Oxley in 1817, 1818 and 1821, followed by Charles Sturt in 1829–1830 attempted to follow the westward-flowing rivers to find an "inland sea", but these were found to all flow into the Murray River and Darling River which turn south.

Over the period 1858 to 1861, John McDouall Stuart led six expeditions north from Adelaide into the outback, culminating in successfully reaching the north coast of Australia and returning, without the loss of any of the party's members' lives. This contrasts with the ill-fated Burke and Wills expedition in 1860–61 which was much better funded, but resulted in the deaths of three of the four members of the transcontinental party.

The Overland Telegraph line was constructed in the 1870s along the route identified by Stuart, who had found enough water to support the needed repeater stations.

Exploration of the outback continued in the 1950s when Len Beadell explored, surveyed and built many roads in support of the nuclear weapons tests at Emu Field and Maralinga and rocket testing on the Woomera Prohibited Area. Mineral exploration continues as new mineral deposits are identified and developed.

While the early explorers used horses to cross the outback, the first woman to make the journey riding a horse was Anna Hingley, who rode from Broome to Cairns in 2006. First woman conquers Outback 

==Mining==
Other than agriculture and tourism, the main economic activity in this vast and sparsely settled area is mining. Owing to the complete absence of mountain building and glaciation since the Permian (in many areas since the Cambrian) ages, the outback is extremely rich in iron, aluminium, manganese and uranium ores, and also contains major deposits of gold, nickel, iron, lead and zinc ores. Because of its size, the value of grazing and mining is considerable. Major mines and mining areas in the outback include opals at Coober Pedy, Lightning Ridge and White Cliffs, metals at Broken Hill, Tennant Creek, Olympic Dam and the remote Challenger Mine. Oil and gas are extracted in the Cooper Basin around Moomba.

In Western Australia the Argyle diamond mine in the Kimberley (Western Australia) is the world's biggest producer of natural diamonds and contributes approximately one-third of the world's natural supply. The Pilbara region's economy is dominated by mining and petroleum industries. The Pilbara's oil and gas industry is the region's largest export industry earning $5.0 billion in 2004/05 accounting for over 96% of the State's production. source – WA.gov.au Most of Australia's iron ore is also mined in the Pilbara and it also has one of the world's major manganese mines, Woodie Woodie.

== Population ==
Owing to the low and erratic rainfall over most of the outback, combined with soils which are usually not very fertile, inland Australia is relatively sparsely settled. More than 90 percent of Australians live in urban areas on the coast. However the outback and the history of its exploration and settlement provides Australians with a culturally valued backdrop, and stories of swagmen, squatters, and bushrangers are central to the national ethos. The song Waltzing Matilda, which is about a swagman and squatters, is probably Australia's best internationally known and most well-loved song.

Aboriginal communities in outback regions have not been displaced as they have been in areas of intensive agriculture and large cities, in coastal areas. For this reason a significant proportion of Australia's indigenous population lives in the Outback, World Book Encyclopedia in areas such as the Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara lands in northern South Australia.

==Medicine==
Flying over western New South Wales. Near the bottom of the picture, a squiggly line appears; apparently, a creek created by recent rain.

==Education==

In most outback communities, the number of children is too small for a conventional school to operate. Children are educated at home by the School of the Air. Originally the teachers communicated with the children via radio, but now satellite telecommunication is used instead.
Some children attend boarding school, mostly only those in secondary school.

==Terminology==
Culturally, many urban Australians have had very generalised terms for the otherwise complex range of environments that exist within the inland and tropical regions of the continent. Regional terminology can be very specific to specific locations in each mainland state.

The concept of 'back' country, which initially meant land beyond the settled regions, was in existence in 1800. Crossing of the Blue Mountains and other exploration of the inland however gave a different dimension to the perception. The term "outback" was first used in print in 1869, when the writer clearly meant west of Wagga Wagga, New South Wales. Coupe, Sheena (ed.), Frontier Country, Vol. 1, Weldon Russell Publishing, Willoughby, 1989, ISBN 1 875202 01 3 

It is colloquially said that 'the outback' is located "beyond the Black Stump". The location of the black stump may be some hypothetical location or may vary depending on local custom and folklore. It has been suggested that the term comes from the Black Stump Wine Saloon that once stood about 10 kilometres out of Coolah, New South Wales on the Gunnedah Road. It is claimed that the saloon, named after the nearby Black Stump Run and Black Stump Creek, was an important staging post for traffic to north-west New South Wales and it became a marker by which people gauged their journeys. 
The MacDonnell Ranges in the Northern Territory are found in the centre of the country.
"The Never-Never" is a term referring to remoter parts of the Australian outback. The outback can be also referred to as "back of beyond", "back o' Bourke" although these terms are more frequently used when referring to something a long way from anywhere, or a long way away. The well-watered north of the continent is often called the "Top End" and the arid interior "The Red Centre", owing to its vast amounts of red soil and sparse greenery amongst its landscape.

==Wildlife==
A Brumby in the Outback
The Australian Outback is full of very well-adapted wildlife, although much of it may not be immediately visible to the casual observer. Many animals, such as kangaroos and dingoes, hide in bushes to rest and keep cool during the heat of the day.

Birdlife is prolific, most often seen at waterholes at dawn and dusk. Huge flocks of budgerigars, cockatoos, corellas and galahs are often sighted. On bare ground or roads during the winter, various species of snakes and lizards bask in the sun, but they are rarely seen during the summer months.

Feral animals such as camels thrive in central Australia, brought to Australia by the early Afghan drivers. Feral horses known as 'brumbies' are station horses that have run wild. Feral pigs, foxes, cats and rabbits are also imported animals that degrade the environment, so time and money is spent eradicating them in an attempt to help protect fragile rangelands.

==Tourism==
The Coober Pedy Oodnadatta One Day Mail Run OKA bus in the outback. The bus serves as a tour bus and mail carrier.
Gosses Bluff crater, one of a number of meteor impact craters that can be found across outback Australia.
There are many popular tourist attractions in the outback. Some of the well known destinations include:
*Alice Springs, Northern Territory
*Australian Stockman's Hall of Fame
*Birdsville, Queensland
*Broken Hill, New South Wales
*Broome
*Coober Pedy, South Australia
*Devils Marbles
*Kakadu National Park
*Kalgoorlie-Boulder, Western Australia
*Kata Tjuta (The Olgas)
*Katherine Gorge
*Kings Canyon (Watarrka)
*MacDonnell Ranges
*Monkey Mia
*Mount Isa, Queensland
*Mount Augustus National Park
*Tennant Creek, Northern Territory
*Uluru (Ayers Rock)
*Willandra Lakes Region
Visitors to the outback often drive their own or rented vehicles, or take organized tours. Travel through remote areas on main roads is easily done and requires no planning. However travel through very remote areas, on isolated tracks, requires planning and a suitable, reliable vehicle (usually a four-wheel drive). On very remote routes considerable supplies and equipment may be required, this can include prearranged caches. It is not advisable to travel into these especially remote areas with a single vehicle, unless fully equipped with good communication technology (e.g. a satellite phone, EPIRB etc.). Many visitors prefer to travel in these areas in a convoy. Deaths from tourists and locals becoming stranded on outback trips occasionally occur, sometime because insufficient water and food supplies were taken, or because people have walked away from their vehicle in search of help. Travellers through very remote areas should always inform a reliable person of their route and expected destination arrival time, and remember that a vehicle is much easier to locate in an aerial search, than a person, so in the event of a breakdown, they must not leave their vehicle.

==Transport==
A road sign warning of potentially dangerous conditions ahead.
The outback is criss-crossed by historic tracks. Most of the major highways have an excellent bitumen surface and other major roads are usually well-maintained dirt roads. Tracks in very sandy or exceedingly rocky areas may require high-clearance four wheel drives and spare fuel, tyres, food and water before attempting to travel them, however most outback roads are easily traversed in ordinary vehicles, provided care is taken. Drivers unused to dirt roads should be especially cautious – it is recommended that drivers reduce their speed, drive with extra care, and avoid driving at night because animals can stray on to roads. Travelling in remote areas in northern Australia is not advisable during the wet season (November to April), as heavy tropical downpours can quickly make dirt roads impassable. In the remotest parts of Australia fuel sellers are located hundreds of kilometres apart, so spare fuel must be carried or refuelling spots calculated carefully in order not to run out of fuel in between towns. In addition, multiple trailer trucks (known as Road Trains) traverse these roads and extreme care must be taken when around these vehicles, due to their weight, length (often three full trailers long) and amount of dust thrown up by 46+ tyres.

The Stuart Highway runs from north to south through the centre of the continent, roughly paralleled by the Adelaide-Darwin railway. There is a proposal to develop some of the roads running from the SW to the NE to create an all-weather road named the Outback Highway, crossing the continent diagonally from Laverton, Western Australia (north of Kalgoorlie, through the Northern Territory to Winton, in Queensland.

Air transport is relied on for mail delivery in some areas, owing to sparse settlement and wet-season road closures. Most outback mines have an airstrip and many have a fly-in fly-out workforce. Most outback sheep stations and cattle stations have an airstrip and quite a few have their own light plane. Medical and ambulance services are provided by the Royal Flying Doctor Service. The School of the Air is a radio-based school using the RFDS radios.

* Birdsville Track
* Burke Developmental Road
* Canning Stock Route
* Colson Track
* Connie Sue Highway
* French Line
* Gary Highway
* Gibb River Road
* Great Central Road
* Gunbarrel Highway
* K1 Line
* Kalumburu Road

* Kidson Track
* Lasseter Highway
* Oodnadatta Track
* Peninsula Developmental Road
* Plenty Highway
* Rig Road
* Sandover Highway
* Strzelecki Track
* Tallawana Track
* Tanami Track
* WAA Line

==See also==

*Central Australia
*Channel Country
*Australian outback literature of the 20th century

==References==

==Further reading==
*Dwyer Andrew (2007) Outback - Recipes and Stories from the Campfire Miegunyah Press ISBN 978 0 522 85380 3
* Read, Ian G.(1995) Australia's central and western outback : the driving guide Crows Nest, N.S.W. Little Hills Press. Little Hills Press explorer guides ISBN 1863150617
* Year of the Outback 2002, Western Australia Perth, W.A.

==External links==
*From this Broken Hill
*Beautiful Australian Outback - slideshow by Life magazine



[[Atomic weight]]

Atomic weight (symbol: A) is a dimensionless physical quantity, the ratio of the average mass of atoms of an element (from a given source) to 1/12 of the mass of an atom of carbon-12 (known as the unified atomic mass unit). The term is usually used, without further qualification, to refer to the standard atomic weights published at regular intervals by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) The latest edition is The updated list of standard atomic weights is expected to be formally published in late 2008. The IUPAC(International Union Of Pure And Applied Chemistry) Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights announced in August 2007 that the standard atomic weights of the following elements would be revised (new figures quoted here): lutetium 174.9668(1); molybdenum 95.96(2); nickel 58.6934(4); ytterbium 173.054(5); zinc 65.38(2). The recommended value for the isotope amount ratio of Ar/Ar (which could be useful as a control measurement in argon–argon dating) was also changed from 296.03(53) to 298.56(31). and which are intended to be applicable to normal laboratory materials. These standard atomic weights are reprinted in a wide variety of textbooks, commercial catalogues, wallcharts etc., and in the table below. 

The term "relative atomic mass" (of the element) may also be used to describe this physical quantity, and is synonymous with it. Indeed the continued use of the term "atomic weight" has attracted considerable controversy since at least the 1960s (see below).

Atomic weights, unlike atomic masses (the masses of individual atoms, not to be confused with relative atomic mass), are not physical constants, but vary from sample to sample of elements that are not mononuclidic elements. This is due to differing isotopic distributions in various samples of non-mononuclidics. Nevertheless, even for elements naturally consisting of two or more nuclides, the atomic weights are sufficiently constant in "normal" samples (those drawn from the environment without special processing) to be of fundamental importance in chemistry.

== Definition ==
The IUPAC definition of atomic weight is:

An atomic weight (relative atomic mass) of an element from a specified source is the ratio of the average mass per atom of the element to 1/12 of the mass of an atom of C.

The definition deliberately specifies "An atomic weight…", as an element will have different atomic weights depending on the source. For example, boron from Turkey has a lower atomic weight than boron from California, because of its different isotopic composition. Nevertheless, given the cost and difficulty of isotope analysis, it is usual to use the tabulated values of standard atomic weights which are ubiquitous in chemical laboratories.

== Naming controversy ==
The use of the name "atomic weight" has attracted a great deal of controversy among scientists. Objectors to the name usually prefer the term "relative atomic mass" (not to be confused with atomic mass). The basic objection is that atomic weight is not a weight, that is the force exerted on an object in a gravitational field, measured in units of force such as the newton.

In reply, supporters of the term "atomic weight" point out (among other arguments) that
*the name has been in continuous use for the same quantity since it was first conceptualized in 1808; 
*for most of that time, atomic weights really were measured by weighing (that is by gravimetric analysis) and that the name of a physical quantity should not change simply because the method of its determination has changed;
*the term "relative atomic mass" should be reserved for the mass of a specific nuclide (or isotope), while "atomic weight" be used for the weighted mean of the atomic masses over all the atoms in the sample;
*it is not uncommon to have misleading names of physical quantities which are retained for historical reasons, such as
**electromotive force, which is not a force
**resolving power, which is not a power quantity
**molar concentration, which is not a molar quantity (a quantity expressed per unit amount of substance)
It could be added that atomic weight is often not truly "atomic" either, as it does not correspond to the property of any individual atom. The same argument could be made against "relative atomic mass" used in this sense.

== Determination of atomic weight ==
Modern atomic weights are calculated from measured values of atomic mass (for each nuclide) and isotopic composition. Highly accurate atomic masses are available National Institute of Standards and Technology. Atomic Weights and Isotopic Compositions for All Elements. for virtually all non-radioactive nuclides, but isotopic compositions are both harder to measure to high precision and more subject to variation between samples. For this reason, the atomic weights of the twenty-two mononuclidic elements are known to especially high accuracy – an uncertainty of only one part in 38 million in the case of fluorine, a precision which is greater than the current best value for the Avogadro constant (one part in 20 million).

 Isotope Atomic mass Abundance 
 Standard Range 
 Si 27.976 926 532 46(194) 92.2297(7)% 92.21–92.25% 
 Si 28.976 494 700(22) 4.6832(5)% 4.69–4.67% 
 Si 29.973 770 171(32) 3.0872(5)% 3.10–3.08% 
 

The calculation is exemplified for silicon, whose atomic weight is especially important in metrology. Silicon exists in nature as a mixture of three isotopes: Si, Si and Si. The atomic masses of these nuclides are known to a precision of one part in 14 billion for Si and about one part in one billion for the others. However the range of natural abundance for the isotopes is such that the standard abundance can only be given to about ±0.001% (see table).
The calculation is
:A(Si) = (27.97693 × 0.922297) + (28.97649 × 0.046832) + (29.97377 × 0.030872) = 28.0854
The estimation of the uncertainty is complicated, especially as the sample distribution is not necessarily symmetrical: the IUPAC standard atomic weights are quoted with estimated symmetrical uncertainties, and the value for silicon is 28.0855(3). The relative standard uncertainty in this value is 1 or 10 ppm.

==Periodic table by atomic weight==

 Group → 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
 ↓ Period 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 
 * Lanthanoids 
 ** Actinoids 

== References ==

== External links ==
*IUPAC Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights
*NIST relative atomic masses of all isotopes and the standard atomic weights of the elements
*Atomic Weights and the International Committee — A Historical Review
*Atomic Weights of the Elements 2009 – semi-official compilation in advance of the formal publication of the report



[[Absolute Infinite]]

The Absolute Infinite is mathematician Georg Cantor's concept of an "infinity" that transcended the transfinite numbers. Cantor equated the Absolute Infinite with God. §3.2, He held that the Absolute Infinite had various mathematical properties, including that every property of the Absolute Infinite is also held by some smaller object.

== Cantor's view ==

Cantor is quoted as saying:

Cantor also mentioned the idea in his letters to Richard Dedekind (text in square brackets not present in original):

== The Burali-Forti paradox ==

The idea that the collection of all ordinal numbers cannot logically exist seems paradoxical to many. This is related to Cesare Burali-Forti's "paradox" that there can be no greatest ordinal number. All of these problems can be traced back to the idea that, for every property that can be logically defined, there exists a set of all objects that have that property. However, as in Cantor's argument (above), this idea leads to difficulties.

More generally, as noted by A.W. Moore, there can be no end to the process of set formation, and thus no such thing as the totality of all sets, or the set hierarchy. Any such totality would itself have to be a set, thus lying somewhere within the hierarchy and thus failing to contain every set.

A standard solution to this problem is found in Zermelo's set theory, which does not allow the unrestricted formation of sets from arbitrary properties. Rather, we may form the set of all objects that have a given property and lie in some given set (Zermelo's Axiom of Separation). This allows for the formation of sets based on properties, in a limited sense, while (hopefully) preserving the consistency of the theory.

While this solves the logical problem, one could argue that the philosophical problem remains. It seems natural that a set of individuals ought to exist, so long as the individuals exist. Indeed, naive set theory might be said to be based on this notion. Although Zermelo's fix allows a class to describe arbitrary (possibly "large") entities, these predicates of the meta-language may have no formal existence (i.e., as a set) within the theory. For example, the class of all sets would be a proper class. This is philosophically unsatisfying to some and has motivated additional work in set theory and other methods of formalizing the foundations of mathematics such as New Foundations by Willard Van Orman Quine.

== See also ==
 
* Actual infinity
* Class (set theory)
* Infinity
* Limitation of size
* Monadology
* Reflection principle
* The Ultimate (philosophy)

== Notes ==
 

== Bibliography ==
* The role of the absolute infinite in Cantor's conception of set
* Infinity and the Mind, Rudy Rucker, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1995, ISBN 0691001723; orig. pub. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1982, ISBN 3764330341.
* The Infinite, A. W. Moore, London, New York: Routledge, 1990, ISBN 0415033071.
* Set Theory, Skolem's Paradox and the Tractatus, A. W. Moore, Analysis 45, #1 (January 1985), pp. 13–20.



[[Acceptance testing]]

Acceptance testing of an aircraft catapult
In engineering and its various subdisciplines, acceptance testing is a test conducted to determine if the requirements of a specification or contract are met. It may involve chemical tests, physical tests, or performance tests. 

In systems engineering it may involve black-box testing performed on a system (for example: a piece of software, lots of manufactured mechanical parts, or batches of chemical products) prior to its delivery. It is also known as functional testing, black-box testing, QA testing, application testing, confidence testing, final testing, validation testing, or factory acceptance testing.

Software developers often distinguish acceptance testing by the system provider from acceptance testing by the customer (the user or client) prior to accepting transfer of ownership. In the case of software, acceptance testing performed by the customer is known as user acceptance testing (UAT), end-user testing, site (acceptance) testing, or field (acceptance) testing.

A smoke test is used as an acceptance test prior to introducing a build to the main testing process.

==Overview==
Testing generally involves running a suite of tests on the completed system. Each individual test, known as a case, exercises a particular operating condition of the user's environment or feature of the system, and will result in a pass or fail, or boolean, outcome. There is generally no degree of success or failure. The test environment is usually designed to be identical, or as close as possible, to the anticipated user's environment, including extremes of such. These test cases must each be accompanied by test case input data or a formal description of the operational activities (or both) to be performed—intended to thoroughly exercise the specific case—and a formal description of the expected results.

Acceptance Tests/Criteria (in Agile Software Development) are usually created by business customers and expressed in a business domain language. These are high-level tests to test the completeness of a user story or stories 'played' during any sprint/iteration. These tests are created ideally through collaboration between business customers, business analysts, testers and developers, however the business customers (product owners) are the primary owners of these tests. As the user stories pass their acceptance criteria, the business owners can be sure of the fact that the developers are progressing in the right direction about how the application was envisaged to work and so it's essential that these tests include both business logic tests as well as UI validation elements (if need be).

Acceptance test cards are ideally created during sprint planning or iteration planning meeting, before development begins so that the developers have a clear idea of what to develop. Sometimes (due to bad planning!) acceptance tests may span multiple stories (that are not implemented in the same sprint) and there are different ways to test them out during actual sprints. One popular technique is to mock external interfaces or data to mimic other stories which might not be played out during an iteration (as those stories may have been relatively lower business priority). A user story is not considered complete until the acceptance tests have passed.

==Process==
The acceptance test suite is run against the supplied input data or using an acceptance test script to direct the testers. Then the results obtained are compared with the expected results. If there is a correct match for every case, the test suite is said to pass. If not, the system may either be rejected or accepted on conditions previously agreed between the sponsor and the manufacturer.

The objective is to provide confidence that the delivered system meets the business requirements of both sponsors and users. The acceptance phase may also act as the final quality gateway, where any quality defects not previously detected may be uncovered.

A principal purpose of acceptance testing is that, once completed successfully, and provided certain additional (contractually agreed) acceptance criteria are met, the sponsors will then sign off on the system as satisfying the contract (previously agreed between sponsor and manufacturer), and deliver final payment.

==User acceptance testing==
User Acceptance Testing (UAT) is a process to obtain confirmation that a system meets mutually agreed-upon requirements. A Subject Matter Expert (SME), preferably the owner or client of the object under test, provides such confirmation after trial or review. In software development, UAT is one of the final stages of a project and often occurs before a client or customer accepts the new system.

Users of the system perform these tests, which developers derive from the client's contract or the user requirements specification.

Test-designers draw up formal tests and devise a range of severity levels. Ideally the designer of the user acceptance tests should not be the creator of the formal integration and system test cases for the same system. The UAT acts as a final verification of the required business function and proper functioning of the system, emulating real-world usage conditions on behalf of the paying client or a specific large customer. If the software works as intended and without issues during normal use, one can reasonably extrapolate the same level of stability in production.

User tests, which are usually performed by clients or end-users, do not normally focus on identifying simple problems such as spelling errors and cosmetic problems, nor showstopper defects, such as software crashes; testers and developers previously identify and fix these issues during earlier unit testing, integration testing, and system testing phases.

The results of these tests give confidence to the clients as to how the system will perform in production. There may also be legal or contractual requirements for acceptance of the system.

=== Q-UAT - Quantified User Acceptance Testing ===
Quantified User Acceptance Testing (Q-UAT or, more simply, the "Quantified Approach") is a revised Business Acceptance Testing process which aims to provide a smarter and faster alternative to the traditional UAT phase. Depth-testing is carried out against business requirements only at specific planned points in the application or service under test. A reliance on better quality code-delivery from the development/build phase is assumed and a complete understanding of the appropriate business process is a pre-requisite. This methodology - if carried out correctly - results in a quick turnaround against plan, a decreased number of test scenarios which are more complex and wider in breadth than traditional UAT and ultimately the equivalent confidence-level attained via a shorter delivery-window, allowing products/changes to come to market quicker.

The Q-UAT approach depends on a "gated" three-dimensional model. The key concepts are:
# Linear Testing (LT, the 1st dimension)
# Recursive Testing (RT, the 2nd dimension)
# Adaptive Testing (AT, the 3rd dimension).

The four "gates" which conjoin and support the 3-dimensional model act as quality safeguards and include contemporary testing concepts such as:
* Internal Consistency Checks (ICS)
* Major Systems/Services Checks (MSC)
* Realtime/Reactive Regression (RTR).

The Quantified Approach was shaped by the former "guerilla" method of acceptance testing which was itself a response to testing phases which proved too costly to be sustainable for many small/medium-scale projects.

==Acceptance testing in Extreme Programming==
Acceptance testing is a term used in agile software development methodologies, particularly Extreme Programming, referring to the functional testing of a user story by the software development team during the implementation phase.

The customer specifies scenarios to test when a user story has been correctly implemented. A story can have one or many acceptance tests, whatever it takes to ensure the functionality works. Acceptance tests are black box system tests. Each acceptance test represents some expected result from the system. Customers are responsible for verifying the correctness of the acceptance tests and reviewing test scores to decide which failed tests are of highest priority. Acceptance tests are also used as regression tests prior to a production release. A user story is not considered complete until it has passed its acceptance tests. This means that new acceptance tests must be created for each iteration or the development team will report zero progress. 

== Types of acceptance testing ==
Typical types of acceptance testing include the following
;User acceptance testing:
:This may include factory acceptance testing, i.e. the testing done by factory users before the factory is moved to its own site, after which site acceptance testing may be performed by the users at the site.
;Operational Acceptance Testing (OAT):Also known as operational readiness testing, this refers to the checking done to a system to ensure that processes and procedures are in place to allow the system to be used and maintained. This may include checks done to back-up facilities, procedures for disaster recovery, training for end users, maintenance procedures, and security procedures.
;Contract and regulation acceptance testing
:In contract acceptance testing, a system is tested against acceptance criteria as documented in a contract, before the system is accepted. In regulation acceptance testing, a system is tested to ensure it meets governmental, legal and safety standards.
;Alpha and beta testing
:Alpha testing takes place at developers' sites, and involves testing of the operational system by internal staff, before it is released to external customers. Beta testing takes place at customers' sites, and involves testing by a group of customers who use the system at their own locations and provide feedback, before the system is released to other customers. The latter is often called “field testing”.

==List of development to production (testing) environments ==
* Development Environment
* Development Testing Environment
* Testing Environment
* Development Integration Testing
* Development System Testing
* System Integration Testing
* User Acceptance Testing
* Production Environment

==List of acceptance-testing frameworks==
* FitNesse, a fork of Fit
* Framework for Integrated Test (Fit)
* iMacros
* ItsNat Java Ajax web framework with built-in, server based, functional web testing capabilities.
* Ranorex
* Selenium (software)
* Test Automation FX
* Watir
* Fabasoft app.test for automated acceptance tests

==See also==

*Acceptance sampling
*Black box testing
*Development stage
*Dynamic testing
*Grey box testing
*Software testing
*System testing
*Test-driven development
*Unit testing
*White box testing

==References==

==External links==
* Acceptance Test Engineering Guide by Microsoft patterns & practices
* Article Using Customer Tests to Drive Development from Methods & Tools
* Article Acceptance TDD Explained from Methods & Tools

theory: acceptant test]

[[Archbishopric of Riga]]

The Archbishopric of Riga (, ) was an archbishopric in Medieval Livonia, a subject to the Holy See. It was established in 1186 as the bishopric of Livonia at Üxküll, then after moving to Riga it became the bishopric of Riga in 1202 and was elevated to an archbishopric in 1255.

== Archbishops of Riga ==

The archbishops of Riga were also the secular rulers of Riga until 1561 when during the reformation the territory converted from Catholicism to Lutheranism and all church territories were secularized. The see was restored as a diocese of the Catholic Church in 1918 and raised into an archdiocese in 1923.

== Bishops and Archbishops of Riga ==

Bishopric of Livonia, 1186–1255 
 1186–1196 Saint Meinhard 
 1196–1198 Berthold of Hanover 
 1199–1229 Albert of Riga 
 1229–1253 Nikolaus of Nauen 
 Archbishopric of Riga, 1255–1561 
 1245–1273 Albert Suerbeer 
 1273–1284 Johannes I of Lune 
 1285–1294 Johannes II of Vechten 
 1294–1300 Johannes III of Schwerin 
 1300–1302 Isarnus Tacconi of Fontiès-d'Aude 
 1303–1310 Jens Grandtitular, never came to Riga 
 1304–1341 Friedrich von Pernstein 
 1341–1347 Engelbert von Dolen 
 1348–1369 Bromhold von Vyffhusen 
 1370–1374 Siegfried Blomberg 
 1374–1393 Johannes IV von Sinten 
 1393–1418 Johannes V von Wallenrodt 
 1418–1424 Johannes VI Ambundi 
 1424–1448 Henning Scharpenberg 
 1448–1479 Silvester Stodewescher 
 1479–1484 Sede vacante (empty seat) 
 1484–1509 Michael Hildebrand 
 1509–1524 Jasper Linde due to deflation, no coins were minted during the reign of Jasper Linde; biographical data exists in alternate formats 
 1524–1527 Johannes VII Blankenfeld due to deflation, no coins were minted during the reign of Johannes VII Blankenfeld; biographical data exists in alternate formats 
 1528–1539 Thomas Schöning 
 1539–1563 Wilhelm von Brandenburg 

A new Bishopric of Livonia was established in Latgalia in 1621 during the Inflanty Voivodeship of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.

== Coinage ==

The Archbishops of Riga were innovators in the field of minting currency, reviving techniques abandoned since the collapse of Rome. The names of individual archbishops after 1418, as well as the years of their respective reigns, are stamped on Livonian pennies excavated at archaeological sites. In many cases, this is the only biographical data available. No Livonian pennies before 1418 have been found.

== See also ==
*Bishopric of Courland
*Bishopric of Dorpat
*Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek
*Bishopric of Reval
*Livonian Crusade
*Livonian Brothers of the Sword
*Monastic state of the Teutonic Knights

== External links ==
* More information about the role of the Archbishopric of Riga in the history of coinage is available at Medieval Livonian Numismatics by William Urban
*Archbishopric of Riga (Archived 2009-10-25)
*Rīgas arhibīskapija (1255-1562)
*Rīgas bīskapija un virsbīskapija
== References ==



[[Albert Frederick, Duke of Prussia]]

Albert Frederick (, ; 7 May 1553 Königsberg &ndash; 28 August 1618 Fischhausen) was duke of Prussia from 1568 until his death. He was a son of Albert of Prussia and Anna Marie of Brunswick-Lüneburg. He was the second and last Prussian duke of the Ansbach branch of the Hohenzollern family. 

==Duke of Prussia==
Albert became Duke of Prussia after paying feudal homage to the King of Poland, Zygmunt August (Ducal Prussia was a fief of Poland), on July 19, 1569 in Lublin. The homage was described by the Polish chronicler Jan Kochanowski in his work Proporzec ("Standard"). During the 1573 Polish election, Albert Frederick attempted to gain acceptance to the Polish senate but was opposed by the powerful Jan Zamoyski (later Grand Hetman of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland) who feared the influence of Protestants in the Polish legislative body. Albert Frederick initially refused to recognize the election of Stefan Bathory and supported the candidacy of Maximilian of Hapsburg. However, at the Toruń sejm of October 1576 he gave his support to the new monarch.

As the great grandson of the Polish king Casimir IV Jagiellon, and as a Duke in Prussia who was fluent in Polish, Albert Frederick was seriously considered for a time as a possible candidate for the Polish throne. He particularly enjoyed the support of Polish Lutherans.

In 1572 he began to exhibit signs of mental disorder. In early 1578, the regency was taken over by his cousin, George Frederick of Brandenburg-Kulmbach (1539–1603). After George Frederick's death in 1605, the Polish king Zygmunt Waza appointed Joachim Frederick as regent, and then in 1608, the new Elector of Brandenburg, John Sigismund. The latter became Duke of Prussia after Albert Frederick's death in 1618.

==Marriage==
Albrecht Friedrich was married in 1573 to Marie Eleonore of Cleves, a daughter of Wilhelm, Duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg and Archduchess Maria of Austria (1531&ndash;1581). Maria was a daughter of Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor and Anna of Bohemia and Hungary.

==Issue==
Albert Frederick and Marie were parents to seven children:
# Anna of Prussia (3 July 1576 &ndash; 30 August 1625). Married John Sigismund, Elector of Brandenburg.
# Marie of Prussia (23 January 1579 &ndash; 21 February 1649). Married Christian, Margrave of Brandenburg-Bayreuth.
# Albert Frederick of Prussia (1 June - 8 October 1580).
# Sophie of Prussia (31 March 1582 &ndash; 4 December 1610). Married Wilhelm Kettler of Courland.
# Eleanor of Prussia (22 August 1583 - 31 March/9 April 1607). Married Joachim Frederick, Elector of Brandenburg.
# Wilhelm of Prussia (23 June 1585 &ndash; 18 January 1586).
# Magdalene Sibylle of Prussia (31 December 1586 &ndash; 22 February 1659). Married John George I, Elector of Saxony.

At his death, the duchy passed to his son-in-law John Sigismund, Margrave of Brandenburg, combining the two territories under a single dynasty and forming Brandenburg-Prussia.

== Ancestors ==



[[Ansbach]]

Ansbach, originally Onolzbach, is a city in Bavaria, Germany. It is the capital of the administrative region of Middle Franconia. Ansbach is situated southwest of Nuremberg and north of Munich, on the Fränkische Rezat, a tributary of the Main river. As of 2004, its population was 40,723.

Ansbach is location of the Ansbach University of Applied Sciences. The city is connected by the autobahn A6 and the highways B13 and B14. Ansbach station is on the Nürnberg–Crailsheim and Treuchtlingen–Würzburg railways and is the terminus of line S4 of the Nuremberg S-Bahn.

==History==
A Benedictine monastery at the place was founded around 748 by a Frankish noble, Gumbertus, who was later canonized. In the following centuries the monastery and the adjoining village (Onoldsbach) grew to become the town of Ansbach (called a town in 1221 for the first time).

The counts of Oettingen ruled over Ansbach until the Hohenzollern burgraves of Nuremberg took over in 1331. The Hohenzollerns made Ansbach the seat of their dynasty until their acquisition of the Margraviate of Brandenburg in 1415. However, after the 1440 death of Frederick I, Elector of Brandenburg, the Franconian cadet branch of the family was not politically united with the main Brandenburg line, remaining independent as "Brandenburg-Ansbach". 

Margrave George the Pious introduced the Protestant Reformation to Ansbach in 1528, leading to the secularization of St. Gumbertus Abbey in 1563.

In 1792 Ansbach was annexed by the Hohenzollerns of Prussia. In 1796 the Duke of Zweibrücken, Maximilian Joseph, the future Bavarian king Max I. Joseph, was exiled to Ansbach after Zweibrücken had been taken by the French. In Ansbach Maximilian von Montgelas wrote an elaborate concept for the future political organisation of Bavaria, which is known as the "Ansbacher Mémoire". In 1806 Prussia ceded Ansbach and the Principality of Ansbach to Bavaria in exchange for the Bavarian duchy of Berg.

At the end of the 17th century, the margraves' palace at Ansbach was rebuilt in Baroque style. 

Jewish families were resident in Ansbach from at least the end of the 18th century. They set up a Jewish Cemetery in the Ruglaender Strasse, which was vandalised and razed under the Nazi tyranny. It was repaired in 1946, but it was damaged several times more. A plaque on the wall of the cemetery commemorates these events. The Jewish Congregation built its synagogue at No 3 Rosenbadstrasse, but it too was damaged by the SA, though it was not burnt down for fear of damaging the neighbouring buildings. It serves today as a "Symbolic House of God". A plaque in the entrance serves as a memorial to the synagogue and to Jewish residents who were murdered during the Holocaust. http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ansbach 

In 1940, at least 500 patients were deported from the Heil- und Pflegeanstalt Ansbach Medical and Nursing Clinic to the extermination facilities Sonnenstein and Hartheim which were disguised as psychiatric institutions, as part of the T4 euthanasia action. They were gassed there. At the clinic in Ansbach itself, around 50 intellectually disabled children were injected with the drug Luminal and killed that way. A plaque was erected in their memory in 1988 in the local hospital at No. 38 Feuchtwangerstrasse. 

During World War II, a subcamp of Flossenbürg concentration camp was located here. Christine O'Keefe. Concentration Camps. Also during the Second World War the Luftwaffe and Wehrmacht had bases here. The nearby airbase was the home station for the Stab & I/KG53 (Staff & 1st Group of Kampfgeschwader 53) operating 38 Heinkel He 111 bombers. On 1 September 1939 this unit was one of the many that participated in the attack on Poland that started the war. During the Western Allied invasion of Germany in April 1945, the airfield was seized by the United States Third Army, and used by the USAAF 354th Fighter Group which flew P-47 Thunderbolts from the aerodrome (designated ALG R-82) from late April until the German capitulation on 7 May 1945. 354 Operations Group Fact Sheet, USAFHRA USAAF Airfields in the ETO AAF Airfields in France, Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg 

At the end of the war, 19-year old student Robert Limpert tried to get the town to surrender to the US Forces without a fight. He was betrayed by Hitler Youth and was hung from the portal of the City Hall by the city's Military Commander Oberst Meyer. Several memorials to his heroic deed have been erected over the years, against great opposition from the citizenry: in the Ludwigskirche, in the Gymnasium Carolinum and at No 6 Kronenstrasse. 

After the Second World War, Ansbach belonged to the American Zone. The American Military authorities established a displaced persons (DP) camp in what used to be a sanatorium in what is today the Strüth quarter. 

Since 1970, Ansbach has enlarged its municipal area by incorporating adjacent communities.

Ansbach was a small town largely by-passed by the Industrial Revolution, an administrative and cultural center. Although all bridges were destroyed, the historical center of Ansbach was spared during World War II and it has kept its baroque character. 

Ansbach hosts several units of the U.S. armed forces, associated with German units under NATO. There are five separate U.S. installations: Shipton Kaserne, home to 412th Aviation Support Battalion, Katterbach Kaserne, formally the home of the 1st Infantry Division's 4th Combat Aviation Brigade, which has been replaced by the 12th Combat Aviation Brigade as of 2006, as part of the 1st Infantry Division's return to Fort Riley, Kansas; Bismarck Kaserne, which functions as a satellite post to Katterbach, hosting their Post Exchange, Theater, Barracks, Franconia Inn, Military Police, and other support agencies, Barton Barracks, home to the USAG Ansbach and Bleidorn Barracks, which has a library and housing.
Ansbach was also home to the headquarters of the 1st Armored Division (United States) from 1972 to the early1990s. 

==Boroughs==
*Eyb, part of Ansbach since October 1, 1970
*Bernhardswinden, part of Ansbach since July 1, 1972
*Brodswinden, part of Ansbach since July 1, 1972
*Claffheim, part of Ansbach since July 1, 1972
*Elpersdorf bei Ansbach, part of Ansbach since July 1, 1972
*Hennenbach, part of Ansbach since July 1, 1972
*Neuses bei Ansbach, part of Ansbach since July 1, 1972
**Strüth
**Wasserzell
*Schalkhausen, part of Ansbach since July 1, 1972
**Geisengrund
**Dornberg
**Neudorf
**Steinersdorf

==International relations==

Ansbach is twinned with:
* Anglet, France
* Bay City, Michigan
* Fermo, Italy
* Jing Jiang, China

==Notable people==
*Albert of Prussia, Grand Master of the Teutonic Order and the first duke of Prussia.
*In the late 16th century, the physician to margrave Georg Friedrich was the famous botanist, Leonhart Fuchs.
*Ansbach was home of the astronomer Simon Marius, who observed Jupiter's moons from the castle's tower. Later he claimed to be the discoverer of the moons, which led to a dispute with the true discoverer, Galileo Galilei.
*Ansbach was the birthplace of the early chemist, Georg Ernst Stahl.
*Queen Caroline, consort of King George II of Great Britain was born in Ansbach in 1683.
*Two poets, Johann Peter Uz (1720–1796) and August von Platen-Hallermünde (1790–1835), were also born there.
*Ansbach was the birthplace of the pre-Linnean botanist, Georg Christian Oeder.
*John James Maximilian Oertel (1811–1882), born in Ansbach, was a Lutheran clergyman who later converted to Roman Catholicism, became a professor of German at Fordham University in the United States, and later edited and founded several newspapers in the United States, including one that would become the leading German-language newspaper in the county, Baltimore's Kirchenzeitung. 
*Also the Bavarian Major General and War Minister Moritz Ritter von Spies (1805–1862) was born in Ansbach.
*Kaspar Hauser lived in Ansbach from 1830 to 1833. He was murdered in the palace gardens.
*Theodor Escherich, bacteriologist and paediatrician, born in Ansbach in 1857. Bacterial genus Escherichia (for example, Escherichia coli) was named after him in 1919, eight years after his death.
*Hermann Fegelein SS Reichsfuhrer Heinrich Himmler's Adjutant and Adolf Hitler's brother in law was a great admirer of his birthplace, Ansbach.
*George H. Brickner, U.S. Representative from Wisconsin.

==Sights==
* Castle of the Margraves of Brandenburg-Ansbach
* Margrave museum
* Kaspar Hauser Monument
* St. Gumbertus and St. Johannis churches, both 15th century

==See also==

* Wolf of Ansbach

==References==

==External links==

*Official Website (German, English, French)
*Ansbach information
*US Army Garrison Ansbach - Ansbach Military Community
*Ansbach University of Applied Sciences



[[National Alliance (Italy)]]

National Alliance (, AN) was a conservative Chiara Moroni, Da Forza Italia al Popolo della Libertà, Carocci, Roma 2008, pp. 75-77 Oreste Massari, I partiti politici nelle democrazie contemporanee, Laterza, Roma-Bari 2004, p. 90 Luciano Bardi - Piero Ignazi - Oreste Massari, I partiti italiani, Egea 2007, pp. 151, 173n. political party in Italy. 

Gianfranco Fini was the leader of the party since its foundation in 1995, however he stepped down in 2008 after being elected to the nominally non-partisan post of President of the Italian Chamber of Deputies and was succeeded by Ignazio La Russa, who managed to merge the party into The People of Freedom (PdL). This finally happened in 2009.

==History==
===Foundation===
National Alliance, launched in 1994, was officially founded in January 1995, when the Italian Social Movement (MSI), the former neo-fascist party, merged with conservative elements of the former Christian Democracy, which had disbanded in 1994 after two years of scandals and various splits due to corruption at its highest levels, exposed by the Mani Pulite investigation, and the Italian Liberal Party, disbanded in the same year. Former MSI members were however still the bulk of the new party and former MSI leader Gianfranco Fini was elected leader of the new party.

The logo followed a template very similar to the Democratic Party of the Left, with the previous logo in a small circle, as a means of legally preventing others from using it. The name was suggested by an article on the Italian newspaper Il Tempo written in 1992 by Domenico Fisichella, a prominent conservative academic. Starting in the 1990s, the MSI gradually transformed into a mainstream right-wing party, culminating in its 1995 dissolution into AN.

===Government participation===
The party was part of all three House of Freedoms coalition governments led by Silvio Berlusconi. Gianfranco Fini was notably nominated Deputy Prime Minister after the 2001 general election and was Foreign Minister from November 2004 to May 2006.

When Gianfranco Fini visited Israel in late November 2003 in the function of Italian Deputy Prime Minister, he labeled the racial laws issued by the fascist regime in 1938 as "infamous", as also Giorgio Almirante, historic leader of MSI, had done before. Il Domenicale He also referred to the Italian Social Republic as belonging to the most shameful pages of the past, and considered fascism part of an era of "absolute evil", something which was hardly acceptable to the few remaining hardliners of the party. As a result, Alessandra Mussolini, the granddaughter of the former fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, who had been at odds with the party on a number of issues for a long time, and some hardliners left the party and formed Social Action. Piero Ignazi, Partiti politici in Italia, Il Mulino, Bologna 2008, pp. 27-31. 

Logo of National Alliance for the 2006 general election

In occasion of the 2006 general election, AN ran within the House of Freedoms, with new allies. The centre-right lost by 24,000 votes in favor of the centre-left coalition The Union. Individually AN received nearly 5 million votes, amounting to 12.3%. In July 2007 a group of splinters led by Francesco Storace formed The Right, which was officially founded on 10 November. Seven MPs of AN, including Teodoro Buontempo and Daniela Santanchè, joined the new party.

===The People of Freedom===
In November 2007 Silvio Berlusconi announced that Forza Italia would have soon merged or transformed into the The People of Freedom (PdL) party. Sky tg24 - Tutte le notizie in formato video Oggi nasce il partito del popolo italiano. Corriere della Sera http://www.ansa.it/opencms/export/site/visualizza_fdg.html_65043240.html 

After the sudden fall of the second Prodi government in January 2008, the breakup of The Union and the subsequent political crisis which lead to a fresh general election, Berlusconi hinted that Forza Italia would have probably contested its last election and the new party would have been officially founded only after that election. In an atmosphere of reconciliation with Gianfranco Fini, Berlusconi also stated that the new party could see the participation of other parties. Via l'Ici e stretta sulle intercettazioni Corriere della Sera Finally, on 8 February, Berlusconi and Fini agreed to form a joint list under the banner of the "The People of Freedom", allied with Lega Nord. Svolta di Berlusconi, arriva il Pdl: "Forza Italia-An sotto stesso simbolo" - LASTAMPA.it After the victory of the PdL in the 2008 general election, AN was merged into the PdL in early 2009. Mussolini's heirs merge with Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia party The Telegraph. 23 March 2009 

==Ideology==
National Alliance's political program emphasized:
*traditional values, being often close to the position of the Roman Catholic Church, despite some social liberal and secular attitudes;
*law and order, especially laws aimed at controlling immigration and implementing punishment;
*support for Israel, the United States and European integration;
*prohibitionism about any kind of drugs, including marijuana.

Distinguishing itself from the MSI, the party distanced itself from Benito Mussolini and Fascism and made efforts to improve relations with Jewish groups. With most hardliners leaving the party, it sought to present itself as a respectable conservative party and to join forces with Forza Italia in the European People's Party and, eventually, in a united party of the centre-right.

Although the party approved market economy and held favourable views on liberalizations and the privatization of state industries, however AN was to the left of Forza Italia on economic issues and sometimes supported statist policies. That is why the party was strong in Rome and Lazio, where most civil servants live. Moreover AN presents itself as a party promoting national cohesion, national identity and patriotism.

Regarding institutional reforms, the party was a long-time supporter of presidentialism and a plurality voting system, and came to support also federalism and to fully accept the alliance with Lega Nord, although the relations with that party were tense at times, especially about issues regarding national unity.

Gianfranco Fini, a moderniser who sees Nicolas Sarkozy and David Cameron as models, impressed an ambitious political line to the party, combining the pillars of conservative ideology like security, family values and patriotism with a progressive approach in other areas such as stem cell research and supporting voting rights for legal aliens. Anyway some of these positions were not shared by many members of the party, most of whom staunchly opposed stem cell research and artificial insemination. 

==Factions==
National Alliance was a heterogeneous political party and within it members were divided in different factions, some of them very organized:
*Protagonist Right (Destra Protagonista), headed by Maurizio Gasparri and Ignazio La Russa, was the bigger faction and the closest to Forza Italia, due to its liberal-conservative stances.
*New Alliance (Nuova Alleanza), formerly called Right and Freedom (Destra e Libertà), headed by Altero Matteoli and Adolfo Urso, was formed by the staunchest supporters of Gianfranco Fini within the party and supported a liberal political agenda.
*Social Right (Destra Sociale), led by Gianni Alemanno, advocated a more "social" approach to economic policy and was considered at the right of the party. It had close ties with the General Labour Union.
*D-Destra, led by Francesco Storace, was the most conservative component of the party, proud of the MSI's tradition and in open opposition to Fini. Formed as a split from the Social Right, in July 2007 the group finally left AN and launched The Right.
*Christian Reformists (Cristiano Riformisti) was a minor Christian democratic faction.

In the party there was also a group named Ethic-Religious Council, whose board members included Gaetano Rebecchini (founder, ex-DC), Riccardo Pedrizzi (president), Franco Tofoni (vice president), Luigi Gagliardi (secretary-general), Alfredo Mantovano, Antonio Mazzocchi and Riccardo Migliori. This was not a faction but an official organism within the party and expressed the official position of the party on ethical and religious matters. Sometimes the group criticized Gianfranco Fini for his liberal views on abortion, artificial insemination and stem-cell research, which led some notable ex-DC members as Publio Fiori to leave the party. Some members of the Council, such as Pedrizzi and Mantovano were described as members of an unofficial Catholic Right faction.

== Popular support ==
The party had roughly 10-15% support across Italy, having its stongholds in Central and Southern Italy (Lazio 18.6%, Umbria 15.2%, Marche 14.3%, Abruzzo 14.3%, Puglia 13.2%, Sardinia 12.9%, Tuscany 12.6% and Campania 12.6% in the last general election), scoring badly in Lombardy (10.2%) and Sicily (10.9%), while competing in the North-East (Friuli-Venezia Giulia 15.5% and Veneto 11.3%).

The party had a good showing in the first general election to which it took part (13.5% in 1994) and reached 15.7% in 1996, when Fini tried for the first time to replace Silvio Berlusconi as leader of the centre-right. From that moment the party suffered an electoral decline, but remained the third force of Italian politics.

In the 2006 general election, the final election to which the party participated with its own list, AN won 12.3% of the vote, securing 71 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 41 in the Senate. In the 2008 general election the party got 90 deputies Excluding Fiamma Nirenstein, Alessandro Ruben and Souad Sbai, whose election was supported both by Forza Italia and National Alliance, http://download.alleanzanazionale.it/Elezioni2008/DeputatiPDLinXVIlegislatura.pdf and 48 senators http://download.alleanzanazionale.it/Elezioni2008/SenatoriPDLinXVILEGISLATURA.pdf elected.

The electoral results of National Alliance in the 10 most populated Regions of Italy are shown in the table below.

 1994 general 1995 regional 1996 general 1999 European 2000 regional 2001 general 2004 European 2005 regional 2006 general 
 Piedmont 8.3 11.2 12.1 7.5 11.9 9.2 8.8 9.5 11.8 
 Lombardy 5.8 10.0 9.0 6.0 9.7 8.6 7.2 8.7 10.2 
 Veneto 7.7 10.7 11.7 8.3 9.8 8.5 9.0 8.1 11.3 
 Emilia-Romagna 9.0 10.3 11.5 8.6 11.4 9.7 8.4 8.9 10.2 
 Tuscany 10.9 13.1 15.8 10.9 14.9 13.0 10.9 10.9 12.6 
 Lazio 25.3 24.5 28.9 20.3 23.1 20.4 18.4 23.9 Combined result of National Alliance (16.9%) and Lista Storace (7.0%), personal list of AN regional leader Francesco Storace. 18.6 
 Campania 20.3 18.3 18.7 10.7 11.2 13.1 13.2 10.6 12.6 
 Apulia 27.5 Forza Italia failed to present a list and thus most centre-right voters voted for National Alliance. 20.4 17.9 12.7 15.5 15.3 16.0 12.1 13.2 
 Calabria 17.2 16.3 23.4 10.2 10.4 15.2 15.5 9.9 11.0 
 Sicily 14.0 14.1 (1996) 16.4 12.1 11.3 (2001) 10.7 14.5 10.6 (2006) 10.9 
 ITALY 13.5 
 15.7 10.3 
 12.0 11.3 
 12.3 
 

==Leadership==
*President: Gianfranco Fini (1995–2008), Ignazio La Russa (regent, 2008–2009)
**Coordinator: Maurizio Gasparri (1995–1998), Ignazio La Russa (2003–2005)
**Spokesman: Francesco Storace (1995–1997), Adolfo Urso (1997–2001), Antonio Landolfi (2001–2005), Andrea Ronchi (2005–2009)
**Head of Political Secretariat: Donato Lamorte (1995–2002), Andrea Ronchi (2002–2004), Carmelo Briguglio (2002–2004), Donato Lamorte (2004–2009)
*President of National Assembly: Domenico Fisichella (1995–2005), Marcello Perina (2005–2006), Francesco Servello (2006–2009)
*Organizational Coordinator: Giuseppe Tatarella (1995–1998), Altero Matteoli (1998–2002), Donato Lamorte (2002–2004), Italo Bocchino (2004–2005), Marco Martinelli (2005–2009)
*Administrative Secretary: Francesco Pontone (1995–2009)

*Party Leader at the Chamber of Deputies: Raffaele Valensise (1994–1995), Giuseppe Tatarella (1995–1998), Gustavo Selva (1998–2001), Ignazio La Russa (2001–2003), Gian Franco Anedda (2003–2004), Iganzio La Russa (2004–2008), Italo Bocchino (deputy-leader of PdL's group, 2008–2009)
*Party Leader at the Senate: Giulio Maceratini (1994–2001), Domenico Nania (2001–2006), Altero Matteoli (2006–2008), Maurizio Gasparri (leader of PdL's group, 2008–2009)
*Party Leader at the European Parliament: Cristiana Muscardini (1994–2004), Roberta Angelilli (2004–2009)

==External links==
* Official website
* Azione Giovani

===Factions===
* Protagonist Right
* New Alliance
* Social Right
* Christian Reformists

===Stephen Roth Institute===
* Continuity or change in the ideology of the Alleanza Nazionale
* The annual report of Anti-semitism worldwide, 2006

== References ==



[[Arno]]

"Ponte vecchio" (The old bridge)
The Arno is a river in the Tuscany region of Italy. It is the most important river of central Italy after the Tiber.

== Source and route ==

The river originates on Mount Falterona in the Casentino area of the Apennines, and initially takes a southward curve. The river turns to the west near Arezzo passing through Florence, Empoli and Pisa, flowing into the Tyrrhenian Sea at Marina di Pisa.

With a length of , it is the largest river in the region. It has many tributaries: Sieve (), Bisenzio (), Ombrone, Era, Elsa, Pesa and Pescia. The drainage basin amounts to more than and drains the waters of the following sub-basins:

*The Casentino, in the province of Arezzo, formed by the upper course of the river until the confluence with the Maestro della Chiana channel.
*The Val di Chiana, a plain dried in the 18th century, which, until then, was a marshy area tributary of the Tiber.
*The upper Valdarno, a long valley bordered from East by the Pratomagno massif and from West by the hills around Siena.
*The Sieve's basin, which flows in the Arno immediately before Florence.
*The middle Valdarno, with the plain including Florence, Sesto Fiorentino, Prato and Pistoia.
*The lower Valdarno, with the valley of important tributaries such as the Pesa, Elsa and Era and in which, after Pontedera, the Arno flows into the Ligurian Sea. The river has a very variable discharge, ranging from minimum values such as 6 m³/s to more than 2,000. The mouth of the river was once near Pisa, but is now several kilometres westwards.

It crosses Florence, where it passes below the Ponte Vecchio and the Santa Trìnita bridge (built by Bartolomeo Ammanati, but inspired by Michelangelo). The river flooded this city regularly in historical times, the last occasion being the famous flood of 1966, with 4,500 m³/s after rainfall of in Badia Agnano and in Florence, in only 24 hours.

The flow rate of the Arno is irregular. It is sometimes described as having a torrent-like behaviour, because it can easily go from almost dry to near-flood in a few days. At the point where the Arno leaves the Apennines, flow measurements can vary between 0.56 m³/s and 3,540 m³/s. New dams built upstream of Florence have greatly alleviated the problem in recent years.

A flood on November 4, 1966 collapsed the embankment in Florence, killing at least 40 people and damaging or destroying millions of works of art and rare books. New conservation techniques were inspired by the disaster, but even 40 years later hundreds of works still await restoration. 

==Gallery==
File:Arno_river.jpg|River Arno in Florence
File:Arno River in Pisa.honeydew.jpg|River Arno in Pisa, near the Ponte della Fortezza (Fortress Bridge)
File:Firenze.Arno.jpg|Banks of the Arno, seen from the Ponte Vecchio (Old Bridge), Florence
File:Arno_Mouth_Italy_aerial_view.jpg|Mouth of the Arno near Pisa
File:Florence Arno 180.jpg|The River Arno in Florence, 180 degree view: the Uffizi Gallery is straight across and the Ponte Vecchio is to the left
File:Florence at night.jpg|The river Arno in Florence at night
File:Ponte amerigo vespucci.JPG|The Ponte Amerigo Vespucci (Amerigo Vespucci Bridge)
File:View From the Ponte Vecchio of the River Arno.jpg|The view of the Arno from the Ponte Vecchio

==References==

Arno Stevens

==External links==
*Basin Authority of the Arno 



[[Aveiro, Portugal]]

Aveiro ( or ) is a city in Aveiro Municipality in Portugal, with a total area of 199.9 km², a total population of 78,463 inhabitants, and 61,430 electors (2006). It is the second most populous city in the Centro Region of Portugal, after Coimbra. However, the city of Aveiro together with neighbouring Ílhavo, make one conurbation which has a population of 119,258 inhabitants, making it one of the most important by population density in the Centro Region.

The municipality is composed of 14 parishes (freguesias), and is located in Aveiro District and the chief city of Baixo Vouga.
The present Mayor is Élio Manuel Delgado da Maia, elected by a coalition between the Social Democratic Party and the Democratic Social Centre.

The municipal holiday is 12 May.

==City Information==
The seat of the municipality is the city of Aveiro, with about 73,003 inhabitants in the 5 urban city (cidade) parishes. Located on the shore of the Atlantic Ocean, Aveiro is an industrial city with an important seaport. The city of Aveiro is also the capital of the District of Aveiro, and the largest city in the Baixo Vouga intermunicipal community subregion.

==Transportation==
Trains: the city is serviced by Alfa Pendular (LisbonBraga; LisbonOporto; FaroOporto) and Intercity (Intercidades: LisbonOporto and LisbonGuimarães) trains, Regional trains, Suburban Trains (Urbanos do Porto) and also a narrow gauge route (direct connections to Águeda and Sernada do Vouga).
Boats: moliceiros in Ria for hire to tourists, for fishing purposes and recreational ones like regattas.
Routes/Primary expressways: A 1 (Porto Lisbon); A 25 (Viseu Guarda Vilar Formoso).
Regional Airport: Aerodromo de Aveiro/São Jacinto (LPAV).
Port/Harbour (harbor): Porto de Aveiro (Ílhavo/Aveiro).

==Malls==
Aveiro and environs have several shopping centers and malls. The most central one being Forum Aveiro with clothes stores, restaurant zone, a book shop and a cinema.

==Tourism==
Aveiro's canal
There are several attractions in the city of Aveiro, including cathedrals, canals and the beaches of the Peninsula de São Jacinto. Attractions near Aveiro include the Ílhavo ceramica de Vista Alegre and the beaches of Barra, Costa Nova do Prado, and Gafanha da Nazare.

==Gastronomy==
Aveiro is known in Portugal for its traditional sweets, ovos moles, trouxas de ovos, both made from eggs and "tripa de aveiro".

==Aveiro nickname==
Aveiro is sometimes called "The Portuguese Venice", because of its canals and boats that remind one of the Italian city of Venice, as the city faced similar problems when it tried to conquer the water.

==History==
The city dates back at least to the 10th century when it was known by its first Latin name of Alavarium, literally, "a gathering place or preserve of birds." The Moors invaded and then held it until the 11th century, after which it became popular with Portuguese royalty. In the winter of 1575, a terrible storm closed the entrance to its port, ending a thriving trade in metals and tiles. The same storm also created a reef barrier at the Atlantic Ocean.

==Industry==
The city is also famous for its production of salt and for its seaweed harvest, which is used for fertilizer in the area.

==Famous people==
The famous explorer João Afonso was born in Aveiro. He was the first European to visit the region of Benin in Nigeria and named the river located there, the Rio Fermoso. He helped to build a fort in Mina. Unfortunately, he never came back to Portugal; he died in the region and is credited for bringing to Lisbon the first pepper that ever came out of those parts. He was also credited as one of the discoverers of the Newfoundland fisheries.

Zeca Afonso was a singer and composer. http://www.diafrica.org/nigeriaop/kenny/DH06.htm 

The city is also famous for the Convento de Jesus (now known as the City Museum "Santa Joana"), built in the 15th century, which contains the tomb of the daughter of Afonso V, St. Joana, who died in 1490. The presence of this royal personage, beatified in 1693, proved to be of great benefit when she bequeathed her valuable estate to the convent. In the 17th and 18th centuries, the convent housed a school of embroidery, which produced many of the sumptuous pieces kept in the museum.

==Aveiro University==
The University of Aveiro was created in 1973 and is considered one of the most dynamic and innovative universities of Portugal, attracting thousands of students to the city.
The University has about 430 professors (with Ph.D. degrees), 11,000 undergraduate students, and 1,300 post-graduate students.

==Sports==
Sport Clube Beira-Mar, an association football club, currently play in the Liga ZON Sagres, the first-tier of Portuguese football. News from local newspapers are available at http://www.recortes.pt.
Beira-Mar Sport Club (founded 1922) has a sports academy with various youth levels participating in all kinds of sports codes notably in Basketball and Futsal in both National and Provincial levels.
 
The other long established club in the city 'Os Galitos' was founded in 1904 and water related sports such as swimming, sailing and rowing are some of it's longest traditional strongest specialities, other sections in the club include chess, basketball, snooker, pool and billiards among others, but rowing is the modality in which the club has a maintained a long and proud tradition going back more than one hundred years, reaching the highest possible excelence as a club with several of it's individual and team of rowers having represented Portugal Internationaly and at the Olimpic games with good classifications on more than a just few occasions.

==Climate==

==Gallery==

File:Aveiro - Moliceiros.jpg|Moliceiros of Aveiro.
File:Praia da Barra - Farol.jpg|Lighthouse of Aveiro (Praia da Barra).
File:Aveiro-Azulejo.jpg|Typical azulejo façades of Aveiro.
File:Aveiro 5.JPG|A square in Aveiro.
File:Aveiro 9.JPG|A street in Aveiro.
File:Aveiro 8.JPG|Street in Aveiro.
File:Aveirobynight.jpg|Aveiro streets by night
File:Catedral_de_Aveiro.jpg|Cathedral of Aveiro
File:Aveiro 7.JPG|Aveiro and one of its canals
File:Aveiro Train station.jpg|The old train station

==International relations==

===Twin towns — Sister cities===
Aveiro's sister cities are:
* - Viseu, Portugal
* - Viana do Castelo, Portugal, since 1910
* - Belém, Brazil, since 1970
* - Pelotas, Brazil, since 1970
* - Bourges, France, since 1989
* - Inhambane, Mozambique, since 1989
* - Arcachon, France, since 1989
* - Ciudad Rodrigo, Spain, since 1989
* - Forlì, Italy, since 1990
* - Santa Cruz, Cape Verde, since 1993
* - Pemba, Mozambique, since 1995
* - Cubatão, Brazil, since 1997
* - Venezia, Italy, since 1998
* - Newark, New Jersey, USA
* - Wallingford, CT, Connecticut, USA
* - Ōita, Japan, since 1978
* - Bonn, Germany

==See also==

*Centro Region
*Duchy of Aveiro
*Aveiro District
*Aveiro Lagoon
*Mário Sacramento

==References==

==External links==

* Portal of Aveiro
*Town Hall official website
*Hotel's Guide (in Portuguese)

 



[[Anthony the Great]]

Anthony the Great or Antony the Great (c. 251–356), (Coptic Ⲁⲃⲃⲁ Ⲁⲛⲧⲱⲛⲓ), also known as Saint Anthony, Anthony the Abbot, Anthony of Egypt, Anthony of the Desert, Anthony the Anchorite, Abba Antonius (Ἀββᾶς Ἀντώνιος), and Father of All Monks, was a Christian saint from Egypt, a prominent leader among the Desert Fathers. He is celebrated in many churches on his feast days: 30 January in the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Coptic Orthodox Church; 17 January in the Roman Catholic Church and the Coptic Catholic Church.

The biography of Anthony's life by Athanasius of Alexandria helped to spread the concept of monasticism, particularly in Western Europe through Latin translations. He is often erroneously considered the first monk, but as his biography and other sources make clear, there were many ascetics before him. Anthony was, however, the first known ascetic going into the wilderness（from between AD 270–271）, a geographical shift that seems to have contributed to his renown. Dag Øistein Endsjø Primordial landscapes, incorruptible bodies. Desert asceticism and the Christian appropriation of Greek ideas on geography, bodies, and immortality. New York: Peter Lang 2008. 

Anthony is appealed to against infectious diseases, particularly skin diseases. "Saint Anthony's fire" has described different afflictions including ergotism, erysipelas and shingles.

==Life==
Most of what is known about the life of Anthony comes from the Life of Anthony. Written in Greek around 360 by Athanasius of Alexandria, it depicts Anthony as an illiterate and holy man who through his existence in a primordial landscape has an absolute connection to the divine truth, which always is synonymous with that of Athanasius as the biographer. Sometime before 374, it was translated into Latin by Evagrius of Antioch. The Latin translation helped the Life become one of the best known works of literature in the Christian world, a status it would hold through the Middle Ages. White, 4. In addition to the Life, several surviving homilies and epistles of varying authenticity provide some additional autobiographical detail.

Anthony was born in Cooma near Herakleopolis Magna in Lower Egypt in 251 to wealthy landowner parents. When he was about 18 years old, his parents died and left him with the care of his unmarried sister.

There are various legends associating him with pigs: one is that for a time he worked as a swineherd.

In 285, at the age of 34, he decided to follow the words of Jesus, who had said: "If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasures in heaven; and come, follow Me.", Mt 19:21 which is part of the Evangelical counsels. Taking these words quite literally, Anthony gave away some of the family estate to his neighbors, sold the remaining property, donated the funds thus raised to the poor, placed his sister with a group of Christian virgins, Athanasius of Alexandria, Life of Antony, 3. In Early Christian Lives, Carolinne White, trans. (London: Penguin Books, 1998), p. 10. a sort of proto-nunnery at the time, and himself became the disciple of a local hermit. Burns, Paul, ed. Butler's Lives of the Saints:New Full Edition January vol. Collegeville, MN:The Liturgical Press. ISBN 0-8146-2377-8. 

The appellation "Father of Monasticism" is misleading, as Christian monasticism was already being practiced in the deserts of Egypt. Ascetics commonly retired to isolated locations on the outskirts of cities. Anthony is notable for being one of the first ascetics to attempt living in the desert proper, completely cut off from civilization. His anchoretic lifestyle was remarkably harsher than that of his predecessors. By the 2nd century there were also famous Christian ascetics, such as Saint Thecla. Saint Anthony decided to follow this tradition and headed out into the alkaline Nitrian Desert region (which became the location of monasteries Nitria, Kellia and Scetis)), about west of Alexandria, on the edge of the Western Desert. Here he remained for some 13 years. 

Also note that the Therapeutae, pagan ascetic hermits and loosely organized cenobitic communities described by the Hellenized Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria in the first century, were long established in the harsh environments by the Lake Mareotis close to Alexandria, and in other less-accessible regions. Philo understood that for "this class of persons may be met with in many places, for both Greece and barbarian countries want to enjoy whatever is perfectly good." Philo,De vita contemplativa 

According to Athanasius, the devil fought St. Anthony by afflicting him with boredom, laziness, and the phantoms of women, which he overcame by the power of prayer, providing a theme for Christian art. After that, he moved to a tomb, where he resided and closed the door on himself, depending on some local villagers who brought him food. When the devil perceived his ascetic life and his intense worship, he was envious and beat him mercilessly, leaving him unconscious. When his friends from the local village came to visit him and found him in this condition, they carried him to a church.

After he recovered, he made a second effort and went back into the desert to a farther mountain by the Nile called Pispir, now Der el Memun, opposite Crocodilopolis. There he lived strictly enclosed in an old abandoned Roman fort for some twenty years. According to Athanasius, the devil again resumed his war against Saint Anthony, only this time the phantoms were in the form of wild beasts, wolves, lions, snakes and scorpions. They appeared as if they were about to attack him or cut him into pieces. But the saint would laugh at them scornfully and say, "If any of you have any authority over me, only one would have been sufficient to fight me." At his saying this, they disappeared as though in smoke, and God gave him the victory over the devil. While in the fort he only communicated with the outside world by a crevice through which food would be passed and he would say a few words. Saint Anthony would prepare a quantity of bread that would sustain him for six months. He did not allow anyone to enter his cell; whoever came to him stood outside and listened to his advice.

The former main altar of the hermitage church in Warfhuizen in the Netherlands with a mural of Anthony Abbot and a reliquary with some of his relics. Since then they have been moved to a new golden shrine on a side-altar especially made for them.

Then one day he emerged from the fort with the help of villagers to break down the door. By this time most had expected him to have wasted away, or gone insane in his solitary confinement, but he emerged healthy, serene, and enlightened. Everyone was amazed that he had been through these trials and emerged spiritually rejuvenated. He was hailed as a hero and from this time forth the legend of Anthony began to spread and grow.

Anthony went to the Fayyum and confirmed the brethren there in the Christian faith, then returned to his old Roman fort. In 311, Anthony wished to become a martyr and went to Alexandria. He visited those who were imprisoned for the sake of Christ and comforted them. When the Governor saw that he was confessing his Christianity publicly, not caring what might happen to him, he ordered him not to show up in the city. However, the Saint did not heed his threats. He faced him and argued with him in order that he might arouse his anger so that he might be tortured and martyred, but it did not happen.

He left Alexandria to return to the old Roman fort upon the end of the persecutions. Here, many came to visit him and to hear his teachings. He saw that these visits kept him away from his worship. As a result, he went further into the Eastern Desert of Egypt. He travelled to the inner wilderness for three days, until he found a spring of water and some palm trees, and then he chose to settle there. On this spot now stands the monastery of Saint Anthony the Great. There, he anticipated the rule of Benedict of Nursia who lived about 200 years later; "pray and work", by engaging himself and his disciple or disciples in manual labor. Anthony himself cultivated a garden and wove mats of rushes. He and his disciples were regularly sought out for words of enlightenment. These statements were later collected into the book of Sayings of the Desert Fathers. Anthony himself is said to have spoken to those of a spiritual disposition personally, leaving the task of addressing the more worldly visitors to Macarius. On occasions, he would go to the monastery on the outskirts of the desert by the Nile to visit the brethren, then return to his inner monastery.

The backstory of one of the surviving epistles, directed to Constantine I, recounts how the fame of Saint Anthony spread abroad and reached Emperor Constantine. The Emperor wrote to him offering him praise and asking him to pray for him. The brethren were pleased with the Emperor's letter, but Anthony did not pay any attention to it, and he said to them, "The books of God, the King of Kings and the Lord of Lords, commands us every day, but we do not heed what they tell us, and we turn our backs on them." Under the persistence of the brethren who told him, "Emperor Constantine loves the church," he accepted to write him a letter blessing him, and praying for the peace and safety of the empire and the church.

Painting of Saint Anthony, a part of The Visitation with Saint Nicholas and Saint Anthony Abbot by Piero di Cosimo, ca. 1480.

According to Athanasius, Saint Anthony heard a voice telling him, "Go out and see." He went out and saw an angel who wore a girdle with a cross, one resembling the holy Eskiem (Tonsure or Schema), and on his head was a head cover (Kolansowa). He was sitting while braiding palm leaves, then he stood up to pray, and again he sat to weave. A voice came to him saying, "Anthony, do this and you will rest." Henceforth, he started to wear this tunic that he saw, and began to weave palm leaves, and never got bored again. Saint Anthony prophesied about the persecution that was about to happen to the church and the control of the heretics over it, the church victory and its return to its formal glory, and the end of the age. When Saint Macarius visited Saint Anthony, Saint Anthony clothed him with the monk's garb, and foretold him what would be of him. When the day drew near of the departure of Saint Paul the First Hermit in the desert, Saint Anthony went to him and buried him, after clothing him in a tunic which was a present from St Athanasius the Apostolic, the 20th Patriarch of Alexandria.

In 338, he was summoned by Athanasius of Alexandria to help refute the teachings of Arius. 

==Final days==

When Saint Anthony felt that the day of his departure had approached, he commanded his disciples to give his staff to Saint Macarius, and to give one sheepskin cloak to Saint Athanasius and the other sheepskin cloak to Saint Serapion, his disciple. He further instructed his disciples to bury his body in an unmarked, secret grave.

He probably spoke only his native language, Coptic, but his sayings were spread in a Greek translation. He himself left no writings. His biography was written by Saint Athanasius and titled Life of Saint Anthony the Great. Many stories are also told about him in various collections of sayings of the Desert Fathers.

Though Anthony himself did not organize or create a monastery, a community grew around him based on his example of living an ascetic and isolated life. Athanasius' biography helped propagate Anthony's ideals. Athanasius writes, "For monks, the life of Anthony is a sufficient example of asceticism." 

==Temptation==
Michelangelo (1487-9). The Torment of Saint Anthony. Oil and tempera on panel. One of many artistic depictions of Saint Anthony's trials in the desert, this painting was copied by the young Michelangelo after an engraving by Martin Schongauer

Famously, Anthony is said to have faced a series of supernatural temptations during his pilgrimage to the desert. The first to report on the temptation was his contemporary Athanasius of Alexandria. However, some modern scholars have argued that the demons and temptations that Anthony is reported to have faced may have been related to Athanasius by some of the simpler pilgrims who had visited him, who may have been conveying what they had been told in a manner more dramatic than it had been conveyed to them. It is possible these events, like the paintings, are full of rich metaphor or in the case of the animals of the desert, perhaps a vision or dream. Some of the stories included in Saint Anthony's biography are perpetuated now mostly in paintings, where they give an opportunity for artists to depict their more lurid or bizarre interpretations. Many artists, including Martin Schongauer, Hieronymus Bosch, Max Ernst, and Salvador Dalí, have depicted these incidents from the life of Anthony; in prose, the tale was retold and embellished by Gustave Flaubert in The Temptation of Saint Anthony. Emphasis on these stories, however, did not really begin until the Middle Ages, when the psychology of the individual became of greater interest. Below are some of these controversial tales.

===The satyr and the centaur===
Saint Anthony was on a journey in the desert to find his predecessor, Saint Paul of Thebes. Saint Anthony had been under the impression that he was the first person to ever dwell in the desert; however, due to a vision, Saint Anthony was called into the desert to find his predecessor, Saint Paul. On his way there he ran into two demons in the forms of a centaur and a satyr. Many works of art depict Saint Anthony meeting with this centaur and satyr. Western theology considers these demons to have been temptations. At any rate, he was stopped by these demons and asked, "Who are you?" To that the satyr replied, "I am a mortal, one of those whom the gentiles call Fauns, Satyrs and Incubi, I am on a mission from my flock. We request thee to pray for us unto the common God, whom ye know to have come for the salvation of the world, and whose praise is sounded all over the earth." Rejoicing at the glory of Christ, St. Anthony, turning his face towards Alexandria... In the end, the centaur showed Saint Anthony the way to his destination. St. Paul the Hermit, Catholic Encyclopedia 

===Silver and gold===
Another time Saint Anthony was traveling in the desert he found a plate of silver coins in his path. He pondered for a moment as to why a plate of silver coins would be out in the desert where no one else travels. Then he realized the devil must have laid it out there to tempt him. To that he said, "Ha! Devil, thou weenest to tempt me and deceive me, but it shall not be in thy power." Once he said this, the plate of silver vanished. Saint Anthony continued walking along and saw a pile of gold in his way which the devil had laid there to deceive him. Saint Anthony cast the pile of gold into a fire, and it vanished just like the silver coins did. After these events, Saint Anthony had a vision where the whole world was full of snares and traps. He cried to the Lord, "Oh good Lord, who may escape from these snares?" A voice said back to him, "humility shall escape them without more. "

===Demons in the cave===
One time Saint Anthony tried hiding in a cave to escape the demons that plagued him. There were so many little demons in the cave though that Saint Anthony's servant had to carry him out because they had beaten him to death. When the hermits were gathered to Saint Anthony's corpse to mourn his death, Saint Anthony was revived. He demanded that his servants take him back to that cave where the demons had beaten him. When he got there he called out to the demons, and they came back as wild beasts to rip him to shreds. All of a sudden a bright light flashed, and the demons ran away. Saint Anthony knew that the light must have come from God, and he asked God where was he before when the demons attacked him. God replied, "I was here but I would see and abide to see thy battle, and because thou hast manly fought and well maintained thy battle, I shall make thy name to be spread through all the world." http://www.catholic-forum.com/saints/golden153.htm 

==Veneration==
Pilgrimage banners from the shrine in Warfhuizen
He was secretly buried on the mountain-top where he had chosen to live. His remains were reportedly discovered in 361, and transferred to Alexandria. Some time later, they were taken from Alexandria to Constantinople, so that they might escape the destruction being perpetrated by invading Saracens. Later, in the eleventh century, the emperor gave them to the French count Jocelin. Jocelin had them transferred to La-Motte-Saint-Didier, which was then renamed Saint-Antoine-en-Dauphiné. There, Anthony is credited with assisting in a number of miraculous healings, primarily from ergotism, which became known as "St. Anthony's Fire". He was credited by two local noblemen of assisting them in recovery from the disease. They then founded the Hospital Brothers of St. Anthony in honour of him. Veneration of Anthony in the East is more restrained. There are comparatively few icons and paintings of him. He is regarded as the "first master of the desert and the pinnacle of holy monks", however, and there are monastic communities of the Maronite, Chaldean, and Orthodox churches which state that they follow his monastic rule. During the Middle Ages, Anthony, along with Quirinus of Neuss, Cornelius and Hubertus, was venerated as one of the Four Holy Marshals (Vier Marschälle Gottes) in the Rhineland. Quirinus von Rom (von Neuss) - Ökumenisches Heiligenlexikon marschaelle 
 Die Kapelle 

==Coptic literature==
Examples of purely Coptic literature are the works of Saint Anthony and Saint Pachomius, who only spoke Coptic, and the sermons and preachings of Saint Shenouda the Archmandrite, who chose to only write in Coptic. Saint Shenouda was a popular leader who only spoke to the Egyptians in Egyptian language (Coptic), the language of the repressed, not in Greek, the language of the rulers.

The earliest original writings in Coptic language were the letters by Saint Anthony. During the 3rd and 4th centuries many ecclesiastics and monks wrote in Coptic. Encyclopædia Britannica 

==Images of the Temptation of St. Anthony==

File:Saftleven Temptation of St Anthony.jpg|Cornelis Saftleven, 1629
File:Temptation of St Anthony by Paolo Veronese.jpg|Paolo Veronese, 1552-3
File:Matthias Grünewald - Visit of St Anthony to St Paul and Temptation of St Anthony - WGA10771.jpg|Mathias Grünewald, ca. 1515
File:Joachim Patinir - Temptation of St Anthony - WGA17103.jpg|Joachim Patinir, ca. 1515
File:Giovanni Battista Tiepolo - Temptations of St Anthony - WGA22254.jpg|Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, first half of 18th century
File:Jan Brueghel (I) - Temptation of St Anthony - WGA03592.jpg|Jan Brueghel, second half of 16th century
File:AnthonyOrsi.jpg|Lelio Orsi, 1570s

==See also==

* Coptic Saints
* Hermit
* Monastery of Saint Anthony, Egypt
* Patron saints of ailments, illness and dangers
* Poustinia
* The Temptation of St. Anthony
* St. Anthony Hall

==Notes==

==References==
;Notes

* The Greek Vita of Athanasius. Ed. by G. J. M. Bartelink ('Vie d'Antoine'). Paris 2000. Sources Chrétiennes 400.
* The almost contemporary Latin translation: in Heribert Rosweyd, Vitae Patrum (Migne, Patrologia Latina. lxxiii.). New critical edition and study of this Latin translation: P.H.E. Bertrand, Die Evagriusübersetzung der Vita Antonii: Rezeption - Überlieferung - Edition. Unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Vitas Patrum-Tradition. Utrecht 2005 (dissertation) free available: 
* Accounts of St Anthony are given by Cardinal Newman ("Church of the Fathers" in Historical Sketches) and Alban Butler, Lives of the Saints (under Jan. 17).
* Burns, Paul, ed. Butler's Lives of the Saints: New Full Edition January vol. Collegeville, MN:The Liturgical Press. ISBN 0-8146-2377-8.
* A Hagiographic Account of the life of St. Anthony from the Coptic Church

===Historical and critical===
*
* E. C. Butler, (1898, 1904). Lausiac History of Palladius, Part I. pp. 197, 215-228; Part II. pp. ix.-xii. (See Palladius of Galatia).
* P.H.E. Bertrand, Die Evagriusübersetzung der Vita Antonii: Rezeption - Überlieferung - Edition. Unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Vitas Patrum-Tradition. Utrecht 2005. available: [http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/01553d.htm Catholic Encyclopedia 1908: "St. Anthony the Great"
* Coptic Monastery of St Anthony the Great website
* 

===Texts attributed to St Anthony===
* "Discourse on Demons", translated by Rev. H. Ellershaw (on-line)
* "Letter To Theodore", translated by Rev. Daniel and Esmeralda Jennings (on-line)

===Further reading===
* Barnes, T.D. 1986. Angel of Light or Mystic Initiate? The Problem of the Life of Antony in Journal of Theological Studies 37: 353-68.
*
* Dragas George Dion 2005. Saint Athanasius of Alexandria: Original Research and New Perspectives. Rollinsford: Orthodox Research Institute.
* Endsjø, Dag Øistein 2008. Primordial landscapes, incorruptible bodies. Desert asceticism and the Christian appropriation of Greek ideas on geography, bodies, and immortality. New York: Peter Lang 2008.
* 
* Kelsey, Neal 1992. The Body as Desert in The Life of St. Anthony in Semeia 57: 131-51.
* Louth, Andrew 1988. “St. Athanasius and the Greek Life of Antony” in Journal of Theological Studies 39: 504-9.
* 
* Pettersen, Alvyn 1989. “Athanasius' Presentation of Antony of the Desert's Admiration for his Body” in Studia Patristica 21: 438-47.
*
* Reitzenstein, Richard 1914. Des Athanasius Werk über das Leben des Antonius: Ein philologischer Beitrag zur Geschichte des Mönchtums. *Heidelberg: Heidelberger Akad. der Wissenschaften.
* Roldanus J. 1993. “Origène, Antoine et Athanase: Leur interconnexion dans la Vie et les Lettres” in Studia Patristica 26: 389-414.
* 
*
*
* Williams, Michael A. 1982. “The Life of Antony and the Domestication of Charismatic Wisdom” in Journal of the American Academy of Religion Studies 48: 23-45.
* 

==External links==

* 
* Video of church historian Andrew Walls who tells the story of Anthony
* Venerable and God-bearing Father Anthony the Great Orthodox icon and synaxarion
* Coptic vita of St. Anthony the Great
* St. Anthony Abbot page at Christian Iconography
* "Of the Life of St. Anthony" in the Caxton translation of the Golden Legend
* Athanasius of Alexandria, The Life of Antony

Antony of Egypt



[[Amblypoda]]

Amblypoda is a taxonomic hypothesis uniting a group of extinct, herbivorous mammals. They were considered a suborder of the primitive ungulate mammals and have since been shown to represent a polyphyletic group.

==Characteristics==
The Amblypoda take their name from their short and stumpy feet, which were furnished with five toes each and supported massive pillar-like limbs. The brain cavity was extremely small and insignificant in comparison to the bodily mass, which was equal to that of the largest rhinoceroses. These animals were, in fact, descendants of the small ancestral ungulates that retained all the primitive characteristics of the latter, accompanied by a huge increase in body size. 

The Amblypoda were confined to the Paleocene and Eocene periods and occurred in North America, Asia (especially Mongolia) and Europe. The cheek teeth were short-crowned (brachyodont), with the tubercles more-or-less completely fused into transverse ridges, or cross-crests (lophodont type), and the total number of teeth was in one case the typical 44, but in another was fewer. The vertebra of the neck unite on nearly flat surfaces, the humerus had lost the foramen, or perforation, at the lower end, and the third trochanter to the femur may have also been wanting. In the forelimb, the upper and lower series of carpal (finger) bones scarcely alternated, but in the hind foot, the astragalus overlapped the cuboid, while the fibula, which was quite distinct from the tibia (as was the radius from the ulna in the forelimb), articulated with both astragalus and calcaneum.

==Types of amblypods==
The most generalized type was Coryphodon, representing the family Coryphodontidae, from the lower Eocene of Europe and North America, in which there were 44 teeth and no horn-like excrescences on the long skull, while the femur had a third trochanter. The canines were somewhat elongated and were followed by a short gap in each jaw, and the cheek-teeth were adapted for succulent food. The length of the body reached about six feet in some cases. 

In the middle Eocene formations of North America occurred the more specialized Uintatherium (or Dinoceras), typifying the family Uintatheriidae. Uintatheres were huge creatures with long narrow skulls, of which the elongated facial portion carried three pairs of bony horn-cores, probably covered with short horns in life, the hind-pair having been much the largest. The dental formula was i. 0/3, c. 1/1, p. 3/3·4, m. 3/3, the upper canines having been long sabre-like weapons, protected by a descending flange on each side of the lower front jaw. 

In the basal Eocene of North America, the Amblypoda were represented by extremely primitive, five-toed, small ungulates such as Periptychus and Pantolambda, each of these typifying a family. The full typical series of 44 teeth was developed in each, but whereas in the Periptychidae, the upper molars were bunodont and tritubercular, in the Pantolambdidae, they had assumed a selenodont structure. Creodont characters were displayed in the skeleton.

==Current taxonomy of animals once classified in Amblypoda==
Few authorities recognize Amblypoda in modern classifications. The following mammals were once considered part of this group:

*Order Pholidota (pangolins)
*Order Pantodonta
**Family Wangliidae
**Family Harpyodidae
**Family Bemalambdidae
**Family Pastoralodontidae
**Family Titanoideidae
**Family Pantolambdidae (including Pantolambda)
**Family Barylambdidae
**Family Cyriacotheriidae
**Family Pantolambdodontidae
**Family Coryphodontidae (including Coryphodon)

*Order Dinocerata
**Family Uintatheriidae (includes Uintatherium, Eobasileus, Tetheopsis, etc. Gobiatherium is sometimes placed in its own family.)

*Order Condylarthra
**Family Hyopsodontidae
**Family Mioclaenidae
**Family Phenacodontidae
**Family Periptychidae (including Periptychus)
**Family Peligrotheriidae
**Family Didolodontidae

==References==
*



[[Amblygonite]]

Amblygonite is a fluorophosphate mineral, (Li,Na)AlPO4(F,OH), composed of lithium, sodium, aluminium, phosphate, fluoride and hydroxide. The mineral occurs in pegmatite deposits and is easily mistaken for albite and other feldspars. Its density, cleavage and flame test for lithium are diagnostic. Amblygonite forms a series with montebrasite, the low fluorine endmember. Geologic occurrence is in granite pegmatites, high-temperature tin veins, and greisens. Amblygonite occurs with spodumene, apatite, lepidolite, tourmaline, and other lithium-bearing minerals in pegmatite veins. It contains about 10% lithium, and has been utilized as a source of lithium. The chief commercial sources have historically been the deposits of California and France.

==History==
The mineral was first discovered in Saxony by August Breithaupt in 1817, and named by him from the Greek amblus, blunt, and gouia, angle, because of the obtuse angle between the cleavages. Later it was found at Montebras, Creuse, France, and at Hebron in Maine; and because of slight differences in optical character and chemical composition the names montebrasite and hebronite have been applied to the mineral from these localities. It has been discovered in considerable quantity at Pala in San Diego county, California; Caceres, Spain; and the Black Hills of South Dakota. The largest documented single crystal of amblygonite measured 7.62x2.44x1.83 m3 and weighed ~102 tons. 

==Gemology==
Transparent amblygonite has been faceted and used as a gemstone. As a gemstone set into jewelry it is vulnerable to breakage and abrasion from general wear, as its hardness and toughness are poor. The main sources for gem material are Brazil and the U.S.. Australia, France, Germany, Namibia, Norway, and Spain have also produced gem quality amblygonite. 

Amblygonite from Taquaral, Itinga, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Scale at bottom is one inch, with a rule at one cm.

==References==
 
* Klein, Cornelis and Hurlbut, Cornelius S., 1985, Manual of Mineralogy, 20th ed., p. 362, ISBN 0-471-80580-7
*Mindat with location data
*Webmineral data
*Mineral Galleries

== See also ==
* List of minerals



[[Amygdalin]]

Amygdalin (from Greek: “almond”), C20H27NO11, is a glycoside initially isolated from the seeds of the tree Prunus dulcis, also known as bitter almonds, by Pierre-Jean Robiquet
and A. F. Boutron-Charlard in 1830, and subsequently investigated by Liebig and Wöhler in 1830. Several other related species in the genus of Prunus, including apricot (Prunus armeniaca) and black cherry (Prunus serotina), also contain amygdalin.

Since the early 1950s, a modified form of amygdalin has been promoted under the names laetrile and "Vitamin B17" as a cancer cure. In reality, laetrile is not a vitamin, and studies have found it to be ineffective, dangerously toxic due to its cyanide content, and potentially lethal. Moss, M. ; Khalil, N. ; Gray, J. "Deliberate self-poisoning with Laetrile"; CMA JOURNAL/NOVEMBER 15, 1981/VOL. 125 pp.1126-1127 The promotion of laetrile to treat cancer has been described in the medical literature as a canonical example of quackery, and as "the slickest, most sophisticated, and certainly the most remunerative cancer quack promotion in medical history." 

==Chemistry==
Amygdalin is extracted from almond or apricot kernel cake by boiling in ethanol; on evaporation of the solution and the addition of diethyl ether, amygdalin is precipitated as white minute crystals. Liebig and Wöhler were already able to find three decomposition products of the newly discovered amygdalin: sugar, benzaldehyde, and prussic acid (hydrogen cyanide). Later research showed that sulfuric acid decomposes it into D-glucose, benzaldehyde, and prussic acid; while hydrochloric acid gives mandelic acid, D-glucose, and ammonia. 
 

Several glucosidase enzymes are known to act on amygdalin, leading to its decomposition by various pathways. Maltase causes partial degradation, giving D-glucose and mandelic nitrile glucoside, C6H5CH(CN)O·C6H11O5. Emulsin, on the other hand, decomposes it into benzaldehyde, cyanide, and two molecules of glucose; this enzyme occurs in the bitter almond, and consequently the seeds invariably contain free cyanide and benzaldehyde. An "amorphous amygdalin" is said to occur in the cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus). Lastly, amygdalin beta-glucosidase and prunasin beta-glucosidase consecutively catalyze loss of the two glucose units to yield mandelonitrile, which can then decompose to form free cyanide and benzaldehyde.

Natural amygdalin has the R configuration at the chiral benzyl center. Under mild basic conditions, this stereogenic center epimerizes; the S epimer is called neoamygdalin. 

==Laetrile==
Laetrile (CAS No. 1332-94-1)
Amygdalin is sometimes confused with laevomandelonitrile, also called laetrile for short; however, amygdalin and laetrile are different chemical compounds. Laetrile, which was patented in the United States, is a semi-synthetic molecule sharing part of the amygdalin structure, while the "laetrile" made in Mexico is usually amygdalin, the natural product obtained from crushed apricot pits, or neoamygdalin. What is laetrile?, National Cancer Institute, Retrieved on 14 January 2007 

Laetrile has a melting point of 214 to 216 degrees Celsius. Its Chemical Abstracts Service Registry Number is 1332-94-1 and its International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry nomenclature name is (2S,3S,4S,5R,6R)-6--3,4,5-trihydroxyoxane-2-carboxylic acid. Laetrile's chemical formula is C14H15NO7 and its PubChem number is 5484354. Laetrile data in PubChem. Its molecular weight is 309.2714 grams/mole. Laetrile is also classified as a cyanogenic glycoside. 

Though it is sometimes sold as "Vitamin B17", it is not a vitamin. Amygdalin/laetrile was claimed to be a vitamin by chemist Ernst T. Krebs in the hope that if classified as a nutritional supplement it would escape the federal legislation regarding the marketing of drugs. He could also capitalise on the public fad for vitamins at that time. 

==Toxicity==
The metabolism of amygdalin produces hydrogen cyanide, a potent toxin. Beta-glucosidase, one of the enzymes that catalyzes the release of cyanide from amygdalin, is present in the human small intestine and in a variety of common foods. This leads to an unpredictable and potentially lethal toxicity when amygdalin or laetrile is taken orally. Ingestion of purified amygdalin or apricot seeds can cause severe toxicity and death due to cyanide poisoning. Numerous case reports in medical literature describe serious cyanide poisoning in patients who ingested laetrile as a cancer treatment. Blood cyanide concentrations may be measured as a means of confirming the diagnosis in hospitalized patients or to assist in the forensic investigation of a fatal overdose. R. Baselt, Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man, 8th edition, Biomedical Publications, Foster City, CA, 2008, pp. 91-93. 

Some laetrile promoters have claimed that the cyanide generated by laetrile is harmlessly detoxified by the mitochondrial enzyme rhodanese. However, these claims are false, as regardless of the level of rhodanese present, the body's available stores of cystine, cysteine, and other sulfur compounds necessary to detoxify cyanide are rapidly depleted in laetrile poisoning. 

==Cancer treatment==
Amygdalin was first isolated in 1830. In 1845 it was used as a cancer treatment in Russia, and in the 1920s in the United States, but it was considered too poisonous. In the 1950s, a purportedly non-toxic, synthetic form was patented for use as a meat preservative, and later marketed as laetrile for cancer treatment. 

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration prohibited the interstate shipment of amygdalin and laetrile in 1977. Thereafter, 27 U.S. states legalized the use of amygdalin within those states. 

=== Initial studies at Sloan-Kettering ===
In 1972, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) board member Benno C. Schmidt, Sr. convinced the hospital to test laetrile so that he could assure others of its ineffectiveness "with some conviction." Kanematsu Sugiura, the scientist who performed the requested tests, found that laetrile inhibited secondary tumors in mice, though it did not destroy the primary tumors. He repeated the experiment several times with the same results. However, three other researchers were unable to confirm Sugiura's results. While these uncontrolled and inconclusive results were considered too preliminary to publish, they were leaked to laetrile advocates, resulting in significant public attention. 

To expand on Sugiura's results, MSKCC researchers conducted a controlled experiment in which they injected some mice with laetrile (as Sugiura had done) and others with placebo. Sugiura, who was unaware of which mice had received laetrile, performed the pathologic analysis. In this controlled, blinded follow-up of Sugiura's initial uncontrolled experiment, laetrile showed no more activity than placebo. 

Subsequently, laetrile was tested on 14 tumor systems without evidence of effectiveness. Given this collection of results, MSKCC concluded that "laetrile showed no beneficial effects." Mistakes in the MSKCC press release were highlighted by a group of laetrile proponents led by Ralph Moss, former public affairs official of MSKCC who was fired following his appearance at a press conference accusing the hospital of covering up the benefits of laetrile. These mistakes were considered scientifically inconsequential, but Nicholas Wade in Science stated that "even the appearance of a departure from strict objectivity is unfortunate." The results from these studies were published all together. 
 

=== Subsequent clinical studies ===

A 2006 systematic review by the Cochrane Collaboration concluded: "The claim that aetrile has beneficial effects for cancer patients is not supported by data from controlled clinical trials. This systematic review has clearly identified the need for randomised or controlled clinical trials assessing the effectiveness of aetrile or amygdalin for cancer treatment." Given the lack of evidence, laetrile has not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 

The U.S. National Institutes of Health evaluated the evidence separately and concluded that clinical trials of amgydalin showed little or no effect against cancer. Laetrile/Amygdalin - National Cancer Institute For example, a 1982 trial of 175 patients found that tumor size had increased in all but one patient. http://www.cancerhelp.org.uk/about-cancer/treatment/complementary-alternative/therapies/laetrile The authors reported that "the hazards of amygdalin therapy were evidenced in several patients by symptoms of cyanide toxicity or by blood cyanide levels approaching the lethal range." 

The study concluded "Patients exposed to this agent should be instructed about the danger of cyanide poisoning, and their blood cyanide levels should be carefully monitored. Amygdalin (Laetrile) is a toxic drug that is not effective as a cancer treatment".

=== Advocacy and legality ===

Although laetrile is widely considered quackery in the medical community, advocates for laetrile dispute this, asserting that "there is an enormous conspiracy" between the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the pharmaceutical industry and the medical community (including the American Medical Association and the American Cancer Society), to exploit the American people, and cancer patients. This narrative was (and is) frequently deployed to spin (explain away) the crack down against, and prosecution of, black market distributors. 

Ironically, the FDA & AMA crackdown (largely compelled by a responsibility to protect Americans from false claims and the potential for cyanide poisoning) escalated the prices on the black market, and helped (unscrupulous) profiteers foster multi-million dollar profits as "B17" smugglers. Laetrile: The Cult of Cyanide Poisoning; Promoting Poison for Profit, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, May, 1979, pg. 1121-1158. http://www.ajcn.org/content/32/5/1121.full.pdf retrieved: Jan. 2012. The Los Angelos Times, April, 1979. http://news.google.com/newspapers?id=bmstAAAAIBAJ&sjid=U4oFAAAAIBAJ&dq=laetrile%20profits&pg=6915%2C1486838 retrieved: Jan. 2012. Rome News Tribune; March, 1977. http://news.google.com/newspapers?id=ouotAAAAIBAJ&sjid=0zIDAAAAIBAJ&dq=laetrile&pg=4755%2C2326000 retrieved: Jan. 2012. 

Some North American cancer patients have traveled to Mexico for treatment with the substance, allegedly under the auspices of Dr. Ernesto Contreras. Actor Steve McQueen died in Mexico following cancer treatment with laetrile and surgery to remove a stomach tumor while undergoing treatment for peritoneal mesothelioma (a cancer that attacks the lining of the abdomen) under the care of William D. Kelley, a dentist and orthodontist who devised a supposed cancer treatment based on laetrile. 

Laetrile advocates in the United States include Dean Burk (now deceased), a former chief chemist of the National Cancer Institute cytochemistry laboratory, and national arm wrestling champion Jason Vale, who claimed that his kidney and pancreatic cancers were cured by eating apricot seeds. Vale was convicted in 2003 for, among other things, marketing laetrile. The court also found that Vale, who had made at least $500,000 from his illegal sales of laetrile, had fraudulently marketed the substance. 

The US Food and Drug Administration continues to seek jail sentences for vendors marketing laetrile for cancer treatment, calling it a "highly toxic product that has not shown any effect on treating cancer." US FDA (June 22, 2004). Lengthy Jail Sentence for Vendor of Laetrile—A Quack Medication to Treat Cancer Patients. FDA News 

==See also==
*United States v. Rutherford, . Finding: The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act makes no express exception for drugs used by the terminally ill and no implied exemption is necessary to attain congressional objectives or to avert an unreasonable reading of the terms "safe" and "effective" in 201 (p) (1).

==References==
* 

== External links ==
* Laetrile/Amygdalin information from the U.S. National Cancer Institute
* Laetrile treatment for cancer, from the Cochrane Library
* Food and Drug Administration Commissioner's Decision on Laetrile
* The Rise and Fall of Laetrile



[[Running amok]]

Running amok, sometimes referred to as simply amok (also spelled amuk, from the Malay meaning "mad with uncontrollable rage") is a term for a killing spree perpetrated by an individual out of rage or resentment over perceived mistreatment.

The syndrome of "Amok" is found in the DSM-IV TR. 

The phrase is often used in a less serious manner in relation to someone or something that is out of control and causing trouble (e.g., a dog tearing up the living room furniture might be said to be running amok). Such usage does not imply murderous actions, and any emotional implications (e.g., rage, fear, excitement) must be gleaned from context. Dictionary.com (definition 3b) 

== Malay origin ==
Amok originated from the Malay word mengamuk , which roughly defined means “to make a furious and desperate charge” much like the ancient Norse berserker warriors practiced before going into battle. Hempel, A. A., Levine, R. D., Meloy, J. D., & Westermeyer, J. D. (2000). Cross-cultural review of sudden mass assault by a single individual in the oriental and occidental cultures. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 45(3), 582–588. According to Malay culture, amok was rooted in a deep spiritual belief. They believed that amok was caused by the hantu belian , which was an evil tiger spirit that entered one’s body and caused the heinous act. As a result of the belief, those in Malaysian culture tolerated amok and dealt with the after effects with no ill will towards the assailant. 

Although commonly used in a colloquial and less-violent sense, the phrase is particularly associated with a specific sociopathic culture-bound syndrome in Malaysian culture. In a typical case of running amok, a male who has shown no previous sign of anger or any inclination to violence will acquire a weapon, traditionally a sword or dagger, but presently a variety of weapons are used, and, in a sudden frenzy, will attempt to kill or seriously injure anyone he encounters. Amok typically takes place in a well populated or crowded area. Amok episodes of this kind normally end with the attacker being killed by bystanders, or committing suicide, citing theories that amok may be a form of intentional suicide in cultures where suicide is heavily stigmatized. For those who do not commit suicide or are killed typically black out and upon regaining consciousness, claim amnesia.

The western world was made known of amok upon reading the journals of Captain James Cook, who was a British explorer in the mid to late 18th century. He discovered firsthand the practice of amok in 1770 during his voyage around the world. He wrote about witnessing individuals behaving in a reckless, violent manner, without cause and “indiscriminately killing and maiming villagers and animals in a frenzied attack.” (Jackson, Y. (Ed.).(2006). Encyclopedia of multicultural psychology . University of Kansas: Sage Publications) 

A widely accepted explanation links amok with male honor (amok by women is virtually unknown).
Running amok would thus be both a way of escaping the world (since perpetrators were normally killed) and re-establishing one's reputation as a man to be feared and respected.
Some observers have related this explanation to Islam's ban on suicide, which, it is suggested, drove Malay men to create circumstances in which others would kill them.

== Contemporary syndrome ==
"Running amok" is used to refer to the behavior of someone who, in the grip of strong emotion, obtains a weapon and begins attacking people indiscriminately, often with multiple fatalities. The slang term going postal is similar in scope.
Police describe such an event as a killing spree. If the individual is seeking death an alternate method is often suicide by cop.

Amok is often described as a culture-bound (or culture-specific) syndrome, which is a psychological condition whose manifestation is strongly shaped by cultural factors. Other reported culture-bound syndromes are latah and koro. Amok is also sometimes considered one of the subcategories of dissociative disorders (cross-cultural variant).

== Link between amok and mental health ==
Amok is traditionally thought to be a culture bound syndrome specific to Malaysia, but upon further investigations and research of various case studies has lead many experts to believe that it is in fact not a culture bound syndrome, but rather a result of mental health issues.
Dr. Pow Meng Yap, a psychiatrist for the Hong Kong Government, wrote that since amok is typically preceded by a period of reflection and brooding, and if the attacker wasn’t killed or killed themselves in the process, they would collapse and upon gaining consciousness, would cite amnesia. Thus leading him to conclude amok is a type of “depressive disorder or a dissociative disorder.” For a condition to be fully culture bound it cannot be found in any other distinctive culture and the culture must be indispensable to its pathogenesis, which in the case of amok, has never been true. A similar study by Jin-Inn Teoh, of University of Aberdeen in London, stated that amok or amok-like behavior has occurred in all countries around the world. There were small discrepancies and variances in the weapons and techniques used. Teoh says that culture has a distinct role in how the act is manifested, but no role in if the act occurs or not. Teoh’s study was the last of its kind in major psychiatric literature, but since its publishing, the spread, or reporting of amok worldwide has only grown. 

== Officially classified as a psychiatric condition ==
Amok was officially classified as a psychiatric condition in 1849 based on the numerous reports and case studies which showed that the majority of individuals who committed amok were, in some sense, mentally ill. However, DSM-IV-TR does not break amok down into two official categories. The two forms are; beramok and amok. Beramok is considered to be the more common of the two and is associated with the depression and sadness resulting from a loss and the subsequent brooding process. Loss includes the death of a spouse or loved one, divorce, loss of a job, money, power, etc. Beramok is associated with mental issues of severe depression or other mood disorders. Amok, the rarer form, is believed to stem from rage, insult, or a vendetta against a person or society for a wide variety of reasons. Amok has been more closely associated with psychosis, personality disorders, bipolar disorder, delusions. 

== Historical and cross-cultural comparanda ==
Early travelers in Asia sometimes describe a kind of military amok, in which soldiers facing apparently inevitable defeat suddenly burst into a frenzy of violence which so startled their enemies that it either delivered victory or at least ensured what the soldier in that culture considered an honourable death. This form of amok appears to resemble the berserker of the Norse, the cafard or cathard (Polynesia), mal de pelea (Puerto Rico), and iich'aa (Navaho). 

In contemporary Indonesia, the term amok (amuk) generally refers not to individual violence, but to apparently frenzied violence by mobs. Indonesians now commonly use the term 'gelap mata' (literally 'darkened eyes') to refer to individual amok. 

In the Philippines, amok also means unreasoning murderous rage by an individual. In 1876, the Spanish governor-general of the Philippines José Malcampo coined the term juramentado for the behavior (from juramentar - "to take an oath"), surviving into modern Filipino languages as huramentado. It has historically been linked with the Muslim Moro people of Mindanao, particularly in the island of Jolo. 

Norse berserkers and the Zulu battle trance are two other examples of the tendency of certain groups to work themselves up into a killing frenzy. The 1911 Webster Encyclopedia comments:

:In 1634, the eldest son of the raja of Jodhpur ran amok at the court of Shah Jahan, failing in his attack on the emperor, but killing five of his officials. During the 18th century, again, at Hyderabad (Sind), two envoys, sent by the Jodhpur chief in regard to a quarrel between the two states, stabbed the prince and twenty-six of his suite before they themselves fell.

== See also ==
* Berserker
* Grisi siknis
* Going postal
* Juramentado
* Tantrum
* Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures

==References==

== External links ==



[[Apostles' Creed]]

The Apostles' Creed (Latin: Symbolum Apostolorum or Symbolum Apostolicum), sometimes titled Symbol of the Apostles, is an early statement of Christian belief, a creed or "symbol". Not in the sense that the word "symbol" has in modern English, but in the original meaning of the word, derived from "Latin symbolum, sign, token, from Greek σύμβολον, token for identification (by comparing with its counterpart), from συμβάλλειν, to throw together, compare" (The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language). It is widely used by a number of Christian denominations for both liturgical and catechetical purposes, most visibly by liturgical Churches of Western tradition, including the Latin Rite of the Catholic Church, Lutheranism, Anglicanism, and Western Orthodoxy. It is also used by Presbyterians, Methodists, and Congregationalists.

The Apostles' Creed was based on Christian theological understanding of the Canonical gospels, the letters of the New Testament and to a lesser extent the Old Testament. Its basis appears to be the old Roman Creed. Because of its early origin, it does not address some Christological issues defined in the later Nicene and other Christian Creeds. It thus says nothing explicitly about the divinity of either Jesus or of the Holy Spirit. This makes it acceptable to many Arians and Unitarians. Nor does it address many other theological questions that became objects of dispute centuries later.

The name of the Creed may come from the probably 5th-century tradition that, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit after Pentecost, each of the Twelve Apostles dictated part of it. It is traditionally divided into twelve articles. However, Ambrose refers to the "Creed of the Apostles" in 390.

==Origins==
The title, Symbolum Apostolicum (Symbol or Creed of the Apostles), appears for the first time in a letter from a Council in Milan (probably written by Ambrose himself) to Pope Siricius in about 390: "Let them give credit to the Creed of the Apostles, which the Roman Church has always kept and preserved undefiled". Apostles' Creed in Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press 2005, ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3), p. 90 But what existed at that time was not what is now known as the Apostles' Creed but a shorter statement of belief that, for instance, did not include the phrase "maker of heaven and earth", a phrase that may have been inserted only in the 7th century. Gardiner Mumford Day,The Apostles' Creed: an interpretation for today (Scribner, 1963), p. 33 

The account of the origin of this creed, the forerunner and principal source of the Apostles' Creed, Arthur Cushman McGiffert, The Apostles' Creed: Its Origin, Its Purpose, and Its Historical Interpretation (2008 ISBN 0559851995), p. 42 as having been jointly created by the Apostles under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, with each of the twelve contributing one of the articles, was already current at that time. 

The earlier text evolved from simpler texts based on , part of the Great Commission, and it has been argued that it was already in written form by the late 2nd century (c. 180). Documents of the Christian Church, 2nd edn, edited by Henry Bettenson (London, 1963), 23. 
 Joseph Lynch, The Medieval Church (Longman: London and NY, 1992), 7. 

While the individual statements of belief that are included in the Apostles' Creed – even those not found in the Old Roman Symbol – are found in various writings by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Novatian, Marcellus, Rufinus, Ambrose, Augustine, Nicetus, and Eusebius Gallus, the earliest appearance of what we know as the Apostles' Creed was in the De singulis libris canonicis scarapsus ("Excerpt from Individual Canonical Books") of St. Pirminius (Migne, Patrologia Latina 89, 1029 ff.), written between 710 and 714. J.N.D. Kelly, Early Christian Creeds, third edition, (London: Longman, Green & Co, 1972), 398–434 Bettenson and Maunder state that is first from Dicta Abbatis Pirminii de singulis libris canonicis scarapsus (idem quod excarpsus, excerpt), c.750. Bettenson, Henry, and Chris Maunder. Documents of the Christian Church. 3 ed. New York: Oxford University Press, USA, 1999. p. 26. Print. This longer Creed seems to have arisen in what is now France and Spain. Charlemagne imposed it throughout his dominions, and it was finally accepted in Rome, where the old Roman Creed or similar formulas had survived for centuries. It has been argued nonetheless that it dates from the second half of the 5th century, though no earlier. Catholic Encyclopedia, Origin of the Creed. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/01629a.htm 

Some have suggested that the Apostles' Creed was spliced together with phrases from the New Testament. Wolfgang Trillhaas, "Creeds, Lutheran Attitude Toward" in The Encyclopedia of the Lutheran Church edited by Julius Bodensieck (Minneapolis: Augsburg, Vol. A-E, p. 629) For instance, the phrase "descendit ad inferos" ("he descended into hell") echoes , "κατέβη εἰς τὰ κατώτερα μέρη τῆς γῆς" ("he descended into the lower, earthly regions").

This phrase and that on the communion of saints are articles found in the Apostles' Creed, but not in the old Roman Creed nor in the Nicene Creed.

==Musical settings==
Musical settings of the Symbolum Apostolorum as a motet are rare. The French composer Le Brung published one Latin setting in 1540, the Spanish composer Fernando de las Infantas published two in 1578.

More recently, in 1979 John Michael Talbot, a Catholic Monk, composed and recorded "Creed" on his album, The Lord's Supper. Rich Mullins and Beaker also composed a musical setting titled "Creed", released on Mullins' 1993 album A Liturgy, a Legacy, & a Ragamuffin Band.

==Text in Latin==
:Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem, Creatorem caeli et terrae,
:et in Iesum Christum, Filium Eius unicum, Dominum nostrum,
:qui conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto, natus ex Maria Virgine,
:passus sub Pontio Pilato, crucifixus, mortuus, et sepultus,
:descendit ad ínferos, tertia die resurrexit a mortuis,
:ascendit ad caelos, sedet ad dexteram Patris omnipotentis,
:inde venturus est iudicare vivos et mortuos.
:Credo in Spiritum Sanctum,
:sanctam Ecclesiam catholicam, sanctorum communionem,
:remissionem peccatorum,
:carnis resurrectionem,
:vitam aeternam.
:Amen. 

==English translations==
===Catholic Church===
The Catechism of the Catholic Church gives the following English translation of the Apostles' Creed. In its discussion of the Creed, the Catechism maintains the traditional division into twelve articles, the numbering of which is here added to the text.

:1. I believe in God, the Father almighty, creator of heaven and earth.
:2. I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.
:3. He was conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit and born of the Virgin Mary.
:4. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and was buried.
:5. He descended to the dead. On the third day he rose again.
:6. He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father.
:7. He will come again to judge the living and the dead.
:8. I believe in the Holy Spirit,
:9. the holy catholic Church, the communion of saints,
:10. the forgiveness of sins,
:11. the resurrection of the body,
:12. and life everlasting.
:Amen.

The English text used in the Mass of the Roman Rite since 2011 is:
:I believe in God,
:the Father almighty,
:Creator of heaven and earth,
:and in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord,
:who was conceived by the Holy Spirit,
:born of the Virgin Mary,
:suffered under Pontius Pilate,
:was crucified, died and was buried;
:he descended into hell;
:on the third day he rose again from the dead;
:he ascended into heaven,
:and is seated at the right hand of God the Father almighty;
:from there he will come to judge the living and the dead.
:I believe in the Holy Spirit,
:the holy catholic Church,
:the communion of saints,
:the forgiveness of sins,
:the resurrection of the body,
:and life everlasting. Amen. Order of Mass http://old.usccb.org/romanmissal/order-of-mass.pdf Order of Mass] 

===Church of England===
In the Church of England there are currently two authorized forms of the creed: that of the Book of Common Prayer (1662) and that of Common Worship (2000).

Book of Common Prayer
 
:I believe in God the Father Almighty,
:Maker of heaven and earth:

:And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord,
:Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
:Born of the Virgin Mary,
:Suffered under Pontius Pilate,
:Was crucified, dead, and buried:
:He descended into hell;
:The third day he rose again from the dead;
:He ascended into heaven,
:And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty;
:From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

:I believe in the Holy Ghost;
:The holy Catholick Church;
:The Communion of Saints;
:The Forgiveness of sins;
:The Resurrection of the body,
:And the Life everlasting.
:Amen.

Common Worship 
:I believe in God, the Father almighty,
:creator of heaven and earth.

:I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord,
:who was conceived by the Holy Spirit,
:born of the Virgin Mary,
:suffered under Pontius Pilate,
:was crucified, died, and was buried;
:he descended to the dead.
:On the third day he rose again;
:he ascended into heaven,
:he is seated at the right hand of the Father,
:and he will come to judge the living and the dead.

:I believe in the Holy Spirit,
:the holy catholic Church,
:the communion of saints,
:the forgiveness of sins,
:the resurrection of the body,
:and the life everlasting.
:Amen.

===Lutheran Church===
:I believe in God, the Father Almighty,
::maker of heaven and earth.
:And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord,
::who was conceived by the Holy Spirit,
::and born of the virgin Mary,
::suffered under Pontius Pilate,
::was crucified, died and was buried.
::He descended into hell.
::On the third day He rose again from the dead.
::He ascended into heaven
::and sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
::From thence He will come to judge the living and the dead.
:I believe in the Holy Spirit,
::the holy Christian church,
:::the communion of saints,
::the forgiveness of sins,
::the resurrection of the body,
::and the life everlasting. Amen. Lutheran Service Book, (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 2006), 159, 175, 192, 207; Lutheran Worship, (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1982), 142, 167, 186; The Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod has a slightly different text posted on their website , and the version used by the German Lutheran Trinity Church Melbourne is also slightly different. 

The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the largest Lutheran denomination in the United States, uses the ELLC ecumenical version. The phrase "he descended to the dead" is footnoted to indicate the alternate reading: "or 'he descended into hell,' another translation of this text in widespread use". It does not alter the phrase "the holy catholic church". The ELLC version is also used in the Evangelical Lutheran Worship, which is the primary worship resource for the ELCA and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada. 

The Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, in its current hymnal Lutheran Service Book includes the phrase "he descended into hell." Apostles' Creed | The Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod 

The Danish National Church still uses the phrase "We renounce the devil and all his works and all his ways" as the beginning of this creed, before the line "We believe in God etc.". This is mostly due to the influence of Grundtvig. See (da).

===Unity of the Brethren===
In the version recited by Unity churches, the only variation from the Lutheran Creed is "I believe in the holy Christian Church," instead of the "catholic Church."

===United Methodist Church===
The United Methodists commonly incorporate the Apostles' Creed into their worship services. The version which is most often used is located at #881 in the United Methodist Hymnal, one of their most popular hymnals and one with a heritage to John Wesley, founder of Methodism. It is notable for omitting the line "he descended into hell", but is otherwise very similar to the Book of Common Prayer version. The 1989 Hymnal has both the traditional version and the 1988 ecumenical version (see below), which includes "he descended to the dead."

:I believe in God the Father Almighty,
:maker of heaven and earth;

:And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord:
:who was conceived by the Holy Spirit,
:born of the Virgin Mary,
:suffered under Pontius Pilate,
:was crucified, dead, and buried;
:the third day he rose from the dead;
:he ascended into heaven,
:and sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty;
:from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

:I believe in the Holy Spirit,
:the holy catholic church, Understood by Methodists as referring to the Christian Church in general 
:the communion of saints,
:the forgiveness of sins,
:the resurrection of the body,
:and the life everlasting. Amen.

The United Methodist Hymnal also contains (at #882) what it terms the "Ecumenical Version" of this creed—a version which is identical to that found in the Episcopal Church's current Book of Common Prayer. This form of the Apostles' Creed can be found incorporated into the Eucharistic and Baptismal Liturgies in the Hymnal and in The United Methodist Book of Worship, and hence it is growing in popularity and use.

===Ecumenical version of the English Language Liturgical Consultation===
The English Language Liturgical Consultation (ELLC) is an international ecumenical group whose primary purpose is to provide ecumenically accepted texts for those who use English in their liturgy. In 1988 it produced a translation of the Apostles' Creed, distinguished among other things by its avoidance of the word "his" in relation to God. The text is as follows: 

:I believe in God, the Father almighty,
::creator of heaven and earth.

:I believe in Jesus Christ, God's only Son, our Lord,
::who was conceived by the Holy Spirit,
::born of the Virgin Mary,
::suffered under Pontius Pilate,
::was crucified, died, and was buried;
::he descended into hell.
::On the third day he rose again;
::he ascended into heaven,
::he is seated at the right hand of the Father,
::and he will come to judge the living and the dead.

:I believe in the Holy Spirit,
::the holy catholic Church,
::the communion of saints,
::the forgiveness of sins,
::the resurrection of the body,
::and the life everlasting. Amen.

==Liturgical use in Western Christianity==
The liturgical communities in western Christianity that derive their rituals from the Roman Missal, including those particular communities which use the Roman Missal itself (Roman Catholics), the Book of Common Prayer (Anglicans / Episcopalians), the Lutheran Book of Worship (ELCA Lutherans), Lutheran Service Book (Missouri-Synod Lutherans), use the Apostles' Creed and interrogative forms of it in their rites of Baptism, which they consider to be the first sacrament of initiation into the Church.

===Roman Catholic Church===
====Rite of Baptism====
An interrogative form of the Apostles' Creed is used in the Rite of Baptism (for both children and adults). The minister of baptism asks the following questions (ICEL, 1974):
:Do you believe in God, the Father almighty, creator of heaven and earth?
:Do you believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord, who was born of the Virgin Mary, was crucified, died, and was buried, rose from the dead, and is now seated at the right hand of the Father?
:Do you believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy catholic Church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting?

To each question, the catechumen, or, in the case of an infant, the parents and sponsor(s) (godparent(s)) in his or her place, answers "I do." Then the celebrant says:
:This is our faith. This is the faith of the Church. We are proud to profess it, in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And all respond: Amen.

====Profession of faith at Mass====
Since the 2002 edition, the Apostles' Creed is included in the Roman Missal with the indication, "Instead of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, especially during Lent and Easter time, the baptismal Symbol of the Roman Church, known as the Apostles’ Creed, may be used." Previously the Nicene Creed was the only profession of faith that the Missal gave for use at Mass, except in Masses for children; but in some countries use of the Apostles' Creed was already permitted.

===Church of England===
The Apostles' Creed is used in the non-Eucharistic services of Matins and Evening Prayer (Evensong). It is invoked after the recitation or singing of the Canticles, and it is the only part of the services in which the congregation traditionally turns to face the altar, if they are seated transversely in the quire.

===Episcopal Church (United States)===
The Episcopal Church uses the Apostles' Creed as a Baptismal Covenant for those who are to receive the Rite of Baptism. Regardless of age, candidates are to be sponsored by parents and/or godparents. Youths able to understand the significance of the Rite may go through the ritual speaking for themselves. Younger children and infants rely on their sponsors to act upon their behalf.

1. The celebrant calls for the candidates for Baptism to be presented.

2. The catechumen or sponsors state their request for Baptism.

3a. If the catechumen is of age, the celebrant will ask him or her if he or she desires Baptism, to which the catechumen will respond: "I do."

3b. If the candidate relies on sponsors, the celebrant asks them if they will raise the child in "the Christian faith and life" (ECUSA BCP), and will raise the child through "prayers and witness to grow into the full stature of Christ" to which the parents will state to each, "I will, with God's help."

4. A series of questions is then asked, to which the reply is always "I renounce them":

:Do you renounce Satan and all the spiritual forces of wickedness that rebel against God?
:Do you renounce the evil powers of this world which corrupt and destroy the creatures of God?
:Do you renounce all sinful desires that draw you from the love of God?

5. The second half of the query is asked, to which the reply is always "I do":

:Do you turn to Jesus Christ and accept him as your Savior?
:Do you put your whole trust in his grace and love?
:Do you promise to follow and obey him as your Lord?

6. The Apostles' Creed is then recited by candidates, sponsors and congregation, each section of the Creed being an answer to the celebrant's question, 'Do you believe in God the Father (God the Son, God the Holy Spirit)?'

===Lutheran Church===
Lutherans, like Roman Catholics, use the Apostles' Creed during the Sacramental Rite of Baptism:

:Do you believe in God, the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth?
:Do you believe in Jesus Christ, His only son, our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, and born of the virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died and was buried. He descended into hell. On the third day He rose again from the dead. He ascended into heaven and sits at the right hand of the Father. From thence He will come to judge the living and the dead?
:Do you believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy catholic Church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting?

Following each question, the candidate answers by saying "Yes, I believe". If the candidate is a child, the godparents are to answer the questions. Lutheran Service Book, "Rite of Baptism". 

==See also==

* Related creeds:
** Athanasian Creed
** Chalcedonian Creed
** Nicene Creed
* Prayer books:
** Roman Missal
** Book of Common Prayer
** Evangelical Lutheran Worship
** Lutheran Book of Worship
** Lutheran Service Book
* Doctrines:
** Virgin birth of Jesus
** Passion (Christianity)
** Crucifixion of Jesus
** Ascension of Jesus
** Session of Christ
** Communion of Saints
** One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church
* Other:
** Catholic Encyclopedia

==References==

==External links==

* The Faith We Profess: A Catholic Guide to the Apostles' Creed by Msgr. Peter J. Vaghi (2008)
* Extract from International Standard Bible Encyclopedia Vol. 1
* Scholarly articles on the Apostles' Creed from the Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Library
* A website with the Creeds in a significant number of languages
* A website with prayers in many languages; a significant number of the languages also have the Apostles' Creed

===English translations===
* 



[[Amicable numbers]]

Amicable numbers are two different numbers so related that the sum of the proper divisors of each is equal to the other number. (A proper divisor of a number is a positive integer divisor other than the number itself. For example, the proper divisors of 6 are 1, 2, and 3.) A pair of amicable numbers constitutes an aliquot sequence of period 2. A related concept is that of a perfect number, which is a number which equals the sum of its own proper divisors, in other words a number which forms an aliquot sequence of period 1. Numbers that are members of an aliquot sequence with period greater than 2 are known as sociable numbers.

For example, the smallest pair of amicable numbers is (220, 284); for the proper divisors of 220 are 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 11, 20, 22, 44, 55 and 110, of which the sum is 284; and the proper divisors of 284 are 1, 2, 4, 71 and 142, of which the sum is 220.

The first few amicable pairs are: (220, 284), (1184, 1210), (2620, 2924), (5020, 5564), (6232, 6368) .

== History ==
Amicable numbers were known to the Pythagoreans, who credited them with many mystical properties. A general formula by which some of these numbers could be derived was invented circa 850 by Thābit ibn Qurra (826-901). Other Arab mathematicians who studied amicable numbers are al-Majriti (died 1007), al-Baghdadi (980-1037), and al-Fārisī (1260–1320). The Iranian mathematician Muhammad Baqir Yazdi (16th century) discovered the pair (9363584, 9437056), though this has often been attributed to Descartes. 
 Much of the work of Eastern mathematicians in this area has been forgotten.

Thābit's formula was rediscovered by Fermat (1601–1665) and Descartes (1596–1650), to whom it is sometimes ascribed, and extended by Euler (1707–1783). It was extended further by Borho in 1972. Fermat and Descartes also rediscovered pairs of amicable numbers known to Arab mathematicians. Euler also discovered dozens of new pairs. The second smallest pair, (1184, 1210), was discovered in 1866 by a then teenage B. Nicolò I. Paganini, having been overlooked by earlier mathematicians.

As of 1946 there were 390 known pairs, but the advent of computers has allowed the discovery of many thousands since then. Exhaustive searches have been carried out to find all pairs less than a given bound, this bound being extended from 108 in 1970, to 1010 in 1986, 1011 in 1993, and to a bound well over that today.

In 2007, there were almost 12,000,000 known amicable pairs. Jan Munch Pedersen Known Amicable Pairs 

== Rules for generation ==
While these rules do generate some pairs of amicable numbers, many other pairs are known, so these rules are by no means comprehensive.

===Thâbit ibn Kurrah rule===
The Thâbit ibn Kurrah rule is a method for discovering amicable numbers invented in the tenth century by the Arab mathematician Thâbit ibn Kurrah. 

It states that if
:p = 3 × 2n − 1 − 1,
:q = 3 × 2n − 1,
:r = 9 × 22n − 1 − 1,
where n > 1 is an integer and p, q, and r are prime numbers, then 2n×p×q and 2n×r are a pair of amicable numbers. This formula gives the pairs (220, 284) for n=2, (17296, 18416) for n=4, and (9363584, 9437056) for n=7, but no other such pairs are known. Numbers of the form 3 × 2n − 1 are known as Thabit numbers. In order for Thābit's formula to produce an amicable pair, two consecutive Thabit numbers must be prime; this severely restricts the possible values of n.

===Euler's rule===
Euler's rule is a generalization of the Thâbit ibn Kurrah rule. It states that if
:p = (2(n - m)+1) × 2m − 1,
:q = (2(n - m)+1) × 2n − 1,
:r = (2(n - m)+1)2 × 2m + n − 1,
where n>m> 0 are integers and p, q, and r are prime numbers, then 2n×p×q and 2n×r are a pair of amicable numbers. Thābit's rule corresponds to the case m=n-1. Euler's rule creates additional amicable pairs for (m,n)=(1,8), (29,40) with no others being known.

== Regular pairs ==
Let (m, n) be a pair of amicable numbers with m<n, and write m=gM and n=gN where g is the greatest common divisor of m and n. If M and N are both coprime to g and square free then the pair (m, n) is said to be regular, otherwise it is called irregular or exotic. If (m, n) is regular and M and N have i and j prime factors respectively, then (m, n) is said to be of type (i, j).

For example, with (m, n) = (220, 284), the greatest common divisor is 4 and so M = 55 and N = 71. Therefore (220, 284) is regular of type (2, 1).

== Other results ==
In every known case, the numbers of a pair are either both even or both odd. It is not known whether an even-odd pair of amicable numbers exists, but if it does, the even number must either be a square number or twice one, and the odd number must be a square number. Also, every known pair shares at least one common factor, higher than 1. It is not known whether a pair of coprime amicable numbers exists, though if any does, the product of the two must be greater than 1067. Also, a pair of coprime amicable numbers cannot be generated by Thabit's formula (above), nor by any similar formula.

In 1955, Paul Erdős showed that the density of amicable numbers, relative to the positive integers, was 0.

== References in popular culture ==
* Amicable numbers are featured in the novel The Professor's Beloved Equation by Yoko Ogawa, and in the Japanese film based on it.

* Paul Auster's collection of short stories entitled True Tales of American Life contains a story ('Mathematical Aphrodisiac' by Alex Galt) in which amicable numbers play an important role.

* Amicable numbers are featured briefly in the novel The Stranger House by Reginald Hill.

== Notes ==

== References ==

* 
* Wells, D. (1987). The Penguin Dictionary of Curious and Interesting Numbers (pp. 145–147). London: Penguin Group.
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* 



[[America Islands]]

#redirect Line Islands



[[Agar]]

Agar or agar-agar is a gelatinous substance derived from a polysaccharide that accumulates in the cell walls of agarophyte red algae. Davidson, Alan, and Tom Jaine. The Oxford companion to food. Oxford University Press, USA, 2006. 805. Print. Retrieved Aug. 08, 2010, from Throughout history into modern times, agar has been chiefly used as an ingredient in desserts throughout Asia and also as a solid substrate to contain culture medium for microbiological work. The gelling agent is an unbranched polysaccharide obtained from the cell walls of some species of red algae, primarily from the genera Gelidium and Gracilaria, or seaweed (Sphaerococcus euchema). For commercial purposes, it is derived primarily from Gelidium amansii.

Agar (agar-agar) can be used as a laxative, a vegetarian gelatin substitute, a thickener for soups, in fruit preserves, ice cream, and other desserts, as a clarifying agent in brewing, and for sizing paper and fabrics.

In chemical terms, agar is a polymer made up of subunits of the sugar galactose. Agar polysaccharides serve as the primary structural support for the algae's cell walls.

== Names ==
The word "agar" comes from agar-agar, the Malay name for the cell (Gigartina, Gracilaria) from which the jelly is produced. It is also known as kanten, China grass, or Japanese isinglass. Agar-Agar at Agar-Agar.org The various species of alga or seaweed from which agar is derived are sometimes called Ceylon moss or Jaffna moss. Gracilaria lichenoides is specifically referred to as agal-agal or Ceylon agar. Agar-Agar at Botanical.com 

== Structure ==
The structure of an agarose polymer.

Agar consists of a mixture of agarose and agaropectin. The predominant component agarose is a linear polymer, made up of the repeating monomeric unit of agarobiose. Agarobiose is a disaccharide made up of D-galactose and 3,6-anhydro-L-galactopyranose. Agaropectin is a heterogeneous mixture of smaller acidic molecules that gel poorly. Agar at lsbu.ac.uk Water Structure and Science 

== Properties ==
Agar exhibits hysteresis, melting at 85 °C (358 K, 185 °F) and solidifying from 32-40 °C (305-313 K, 90-104 °F). This property lends a suitable balance between easy melting and good gel stability at relatively high temperatures. Since many scientific applications require incubation at temperatures close to human body temperature (37 °C), agar is more appropriate than other solidifying agents that melt at this temperature, such as gelatin.

== Microbiology ==
100mm diameter petri dishes containing agar jelly for bacterial culture

Agar is used throughout the world to provide a solid surface containing medium for the growth of bacteria and fungi. Microbial growth does not destroy the gel structure because most microorganisms are unable to digest agar. Agar is typically sold commercially as a powder that can be mixed with water and prepared similarly to gelatin before use as a growth medium. Other ingredients are added to the agar to meet the nutritional needs of the microbes. Many specific formulations are available, because some microbes prefer certain environmental conditions over others.

== Motility assays ==
As a gel, an agarose medium is porous and therefore can be used to measure microorganism motility and mobility. The gel's porosity is directly related to the concentration of agarose in the medium, so various levels of effective viscosity (from the cell's "point of view") can be selected, depending on the experimental objectives.

A common identification assay involves culturing a sample of the organism deep within a block of nutrient agar. Cells will attempt to grow within the gel structure. Motile species will be able to migrate, albeit slowly, throughout the gel and infiltration rates can then be visualized, whereas non-motile species will show growth only along the now-empty path introduced by the invasive initial sample deposition.

Another setup commonly used for measuring chemotaxis and chemokinesis utilizes the under-agarose cell migration assay, whereby a layer of agarose gel is placed between a cell population and a chemoattractant. As a concentration gradient develops from the diffusion of the chemoattractant into the gel, various cell populations requiring different stimulation levels to migrate can then be visualized over time using microphotography as they tunnel upward through the gel against gravity along the gradient.

== Plant biology ==
Physcomitrella patens plants growing axenically in vitro on agar plates (Petri dish, 9 cm diameter).

Research grade agar is used extensively in plant biology as it is supplemented with a nutrient and vitamin mixture that allows for seedling germination in petri dishes under sterile conditions (given that the seeds are sterilized as well). Nutrient and vitamin supplementation for Arabidopsis thaliana is standard across most experimental conditions. Murashige & Skoog (MS) nutrient mix and Gamborg's B5 vitamin mix in general are used. A 1.0% agar/0.44% MS+vitamin dH2O solution is suitable for growth media between normal growth temps.

The solidification of the agar within any growth media (GM) is pH-dependent, with an optimal range between 5.4-5.7. Usually, the application of KOH is needed to increase the pH to this range. A general guideline is about 600 µl 0.1M KOH per 250 ml GM. This entire mixture can be sterilized using the liquid cycle of an autoclave.

This medium nicely lends itself to the application of specific concentrations of phytohormones etc. to induce specific growth patterns in that one can easily prepare a solution containing the desired amount of hormone, add it to the known volume of GM, and autoclave to both sterilize and evaporate off any solvent that may have been used to dissolve the often-polar hormones. This hormone/GM solution can be spread across the surface of petri dishes sown with germinated and/or etiolated seedlings.

Experiments with the moss Physcomitrella patens, however, have shown that choice of the gelling agent — agar or Gelrite - does influence phytohormone sensitivity of the plant cell culture. 
 

== Molecular biology ==
Agar is a heterogeneous mixture of two classes of polysaccharide: agaropectin and agarose. Although both polysaccharide classes share the same galactose-based backbone, agaropectin is heavily modified with acidic side-groups, such as sulfate and pyruvate.

The neutral charge and lower degree of chemical complexity of agarose make it less likely to interact with biomolecules, and, therefore, agarose has become the preferred matrix for work with proteins and nucleic acids. Gels made from purified agarose have a relatively large pore size, making them useful for separation of large molecules, such as proteins and protein complexes >200 kilodaltons, as well as DNA fragments >100 basepairs. Agarose has been used widely for immunodiffusion and immunoelectrophoresis, as the agarose fibers functions as an anchor for immunocomplexes. Agarose is used generally as the medium for analytical scale electrophoretic separation in agarose gel electrophoresis and for column-based preparative scale separation as in gel filtration chromatography and affinity chromatography.

== Culinary ==
Sago at gulaman in Filipino cuisine is made from agar (gulaman), sago (tapioca pearls), and fruit juice flavored with pandan
Agar-agar is a natural vegetable gelatin counterpart. White and semi-translucent, it is sold in packages as washed and dried strips or in powdered form. It can be used to make jellies, puddings, and custards. For making jelly, it is boiled in water until the solids dissolve. Sweetener, flavouring, colouring, fruit or vegetables are then added and the liquid is poured into molds to be served as desserts and vegetable aspics, or incorporated with other desserts, such as a jelly layer in a cake.

Agar-agar is approximately 80% fiber, so it can serve as an intestinal regulator. Its bulk quality is behind one of the latest fad diets in Asia, the kanten (the Japanese word for agar-agar ) diet. Once ingested, kanten triples in size and absorbs water. This results in the consumer's feeling more full. This diet has recently received some press coverage in the United States as well. The diet has shown promise in obesity studies. 

In Philippine cuisine, it is used to make the jelly bars in the various gulaman refreshments or desserts such as sago gulaman (aka gulaman at sago), buko pandan, agar flan, halo-halo, the various Filipino fruit salads, black gulaman, and red gulaman. One use of agar in Japanese cuisine is anmitsu, a dessert made of small cubes of agar jelly and served in a bowl with various fruits or other ingredients. It is also the main ingredient in Mizuyōkan, another popular Japanese food. (See very top image.) In Indian cuisine, agar agar is known as "China grass" and is used for making desserts. In Burmese cuisine, a sweet jelly known as kyauk kyaw (​ေကျာက်​ေကြာ ) is made from agar. In Russia, it is used in addition or as a replacement to pectin in jams and marmalades, as a substitute to gelatin for its superior gelling properties, and as a strengthening ingredient in souffles and custards. Another use of agar-agar is in Ptich'ye moloko (Bird's Milk), a rich gellied custard (or soft meringue) used as a cake filling or chocolate-glazed as individual sweets.

== Other uses ==
Agar is used:
* As an impression material in dentistry.
* To make salt bridges for use in electrochemistry.
* In formicariums as a transparent substitute for sand and a source of nutrition.
* By Kanten Clay Studio as a natural ingredient to form modelling clay for young children to play with.

== See also ==
* Agarose gel electrophoresis
* Algaculture
* Anmitsu
* Asepsis
* Carrageenan
* Gulaman
* Halo-halo
* Immunodiffusion, Immunoelectrophoresis
* Kanten Clay Studio
* Petri dish
* R2a agar
* Rhodophyta
* Robert Koch
* SEAgel
* Walter Hesse

== References ==



[[Acid rain]]

 
Processes involved in acid deposition (note that only SO2 and NOx play a significant role in acid rain).
Acid rain is a rain or any other form of precipitation that is unusually acidic, meaning that it possesses elevated levels of hydrogen ions (low pH). It can have harmful effects on plants, aquatic animals, and infrastructure. Acid rain is caused by emissions of carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides which react with the water molecules in the atmosphere to produce acids. Governments have made efforts since the 1970s to reduce the release of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere with positive results. Nitrogen oxides can also be produced naturally by lightning strikes and sulfur dioxide is produced by volcanic eruptions. The chemicals in acid rain can cause paint to peel, corrosion of steel structures such as bridges, and erosion of stone statues.

==Definition==
"Acid rain" is a popular term referring to the deposition of wet (rain, snow, sleet, fog, cloudwater, and dew) and dry (acidifying particles and gases) acidic components. Distilled water, once carbon dioxide is removed, has a neutral pH of 7. Liquids with a pH less than 7 are acidic, and those with a pH greater than 7 are alkaline. “Clean” or unpolluted rain has a slightly acidic pH of over 5.7, because carbon dioxide and water in the air react together to form carbonic acid, but unpolluted rain also contains other chemicals. A common example is nitric acid produced by electric discharge in the atmosphere such as lightning. Likens, G. E., W. C. Keene, J. M. Miller and J. N. Galloway. 1987. Chemistry of precipitation from a remote, terrestrial site in Australia. J. Geophys. Res. 92(D11):13,299-13,314. Carbonic acid is formed by the reaction

: (l) + (g) (aq)

Carbonic acid then can ionize in water forming low concentrations of hydronium and carbonate ions:

: (l) + (aq) − (aq) + + (aq)

Acid deposition as an environmental issue would include additional acids to .

==History==
Trees killed by acid rain 
The corrosive effect of polluted, acidic city air on limestone and marble was noted in the 17th century by John Evelyn, who remarked upon the poor condition of the Arundel marbles. E. S. de Beer, ed. The Diary of John Evelyn, III, 1955 (19 September 1667) p. 495. 
Since the Industrial Revolution, emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides to the atmosphere have increased. New Science Directorate Bio Mass Burning Redirect Weathers, K. C. and G. E. Likens. 2006. Acid rain. pp. 1549–1561. In: W. N. Rom (ed.). Environmental and Occupational Medicine. Lippincott-Raven Publ., Philadelphia. Fourth Edition. In 1852, Robert Angus Smith was the first to show the relationship between acid rain and atmospheric pollution in Manchester, England. Seinfeld, John H.; Pandis, Spyros N (1998). Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics — From Air Pollution to Climate Change. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-0-471-17816-3 Though acidic rain was discovered in 1852, it was not until the late 1960s that scientists began widely observing and studying the phenomenon. Likens, G. E., F. H. Bormann and N. M. Johnson. 1972. Acid rain. Environment 14(2):33-40. The term "acid rain" was coined in 1872 by Robert Angus Smith. EPA: Acid Rain in New England, A Brief History Canadian Harold Harvey was among the first to research a "dead" lake. Public awareness of acid rain in the U.S increased in the 1970s after The New York Times promulgated reports from the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest in New Hampshire of the myriad deleterious environmental effects demonstrated to result from it. Likens, G. E. and F. H. Bormann. 1974. Acid rain: a serious regional environmental problem. Science 184(4142):1176–1179. 

Occasional pH readings in rain and fog water of well below 2.4 have been reported in industrialized areas. Industrial acid rain is a substantial problem in China and Russia Galloway, J. N., Zhao Dianwu, Xiong Jiling and G. E. Likens. 1987. Acid rain: a comparison of China, United States and a remote area. Science 236:1559–1562. and areas down-wind from them. These areas all burn sulfur-containing coal to generate heat and electricity. [http://www.asl-associates.com/sulphur1.htm ] The problem of acid rain not only has increased with population and industrial growth, but has become more widespread. The use of tall smokestacks to reduce local pollution has contributed to the spread of acid rain by releasing gases into regional atmospheric circulation. Likens, G. E., R. F. Wright, J. N. Galloway and T. J. Butler. 1979. Acid rain. Sci. Amer. 241(4):43-51. Likens, G. E. 1984. Acid rain: the smokestack is the “smoking gun.” Garden 8(4):12-18. Often deposition occurs a considerable distance downwind of the emissions, with mountainous regions tending to receive the greatest deposition (simply because of their higher rainfall). An example of this effect is the low pH of rain which falls in Scandinavia. http://www.emep.int/publ/common_publications.html 

===History of acid rain in the United States===
stele (wrapped), Harvard University, Cambridge, MA - IMG 4607.JPG|thumb|Since 1998, Harvard University wraps some of the bronze and marble statues on its campus, such as this "Chinese stele", with waterproof covers every winter, in order to protect them from erosion caused by acid rain (or, actually, acid snow) "[http://harvardmagazine.com/2000/03/art-under-wraps.html Art Under Wraps" , Harvard Magazine, March–April 2000 ]]
In 1980, the U.S. Congress passed an Acid Deposition Act. Lackey (1997) - Science, policy, and acid rain: lessons learned. Renewable Resources Journal. 15(1): 9-13. This Act established a 18-year assessment and research program under the direction of the National Acidic Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP). NAPAP looked at the entire problem from a scientific perspective. It enlarged a network of monitoring sites to determine how acidic the precipitation actually was, and to determine long term trends, and established a network for dry deposition. It looked at the effects of acid rain and funded research on the effects of acid precipitation on freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems, historical buildings, monuments, and building materials. It also funded extensive studies on atmospheric processes and potential control programs. From the start, policy advocates from all sides attempted to influence NAPAP activities to support their particular policy advocacy efforts, or to disparage those of their opponents. For the U.S. Government's scientific enterprise, a significant impact of NAPAP were lessons learned in the assessment process and in environmental research management to a relatively large group of scientists, program managers and the public. - Winstanley (1998). Acid rain: science and policy making. Environmental Science and Policy. 1(1): 51-57. 

In 1991, DENR provided its first assessment of acid rain in the United States. It reported that 5% of New England Lakes were acidic, with sulfates being the most common problem. They noted that 2% of the lakes could no longer support Brook Trout, and 6% of the lakes were unsuitable for the survival of many species of minnow. Subsequent Reports to Congress have documented chemical changes in soil and freshwater ecosystems, nitrogen saturation, decreases in amounts of nutrients in soil, episodic acidification, regional haze, and damage to historical monuments.

Meanwhile, in 1989, the US Congress passed a series of amendments to the Clean Air Act. Title IV of these amendments established the Acid Rain Program, a cap and trade system designed to control emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. Title IV called for a total reduction of about 10 million tons of SO2 emissions from power plants. It was implemented in two phases. Phase I began in 1995, and limited sulfur dioxide emissions from 110 of the largest power plants to a combined total of 8.7 million tons of sulfur dioxide. One power plant in New England (Merrimack) was in Phase I. Four other plants (Newington, Mount Tom, Brayton Point, and Salem Harbor) were added under other provisions of the program. Phase II began in 2000, and affects most of the power plants in the country.

During the 1990s, research continued. On March 10, 2005, EPA issued the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR). This rule provides states with a solution to the problem of power plant pollution that drifts from one state to another. CAIR will permanently cap emissions of SO2 and NOx in the eastern United States. When fully implemented, CAIR will reduce SO2 emissions in 28 eastern states and the District of Columbia by over 70 percent and NOx emissions by over 60 percent from 2003 levels. 

Overall, the Program's cap and trade program has been successful in achieving its goals. Since the 1990s, SO2 emissions have dropped 40%, and according to the Pacific Research Institute, acid rain levels have dropped 65% since 1976. 'Cap-and-trade' model eyed for cutting greenhouse gases, San Francisco Chronicle, December 3, 2007. However, this was significantly less successful than conventional regulation in the European Union, which saw a decrease of over 70% in SO2 emissions during the same time period. Gilberston, T. and Reyes, O. 2009. Carbon Trading: how it works and why it fails. Dag Hammerskjold Foundation: 22 

In 2007, total SO2 emissions were 8.9 million tons, achieving the program's long term goal ahead of the 2010 statutory deadline. Acid Rain Program 2007 Progress Report, United States Environmental Protection Agency, January 2009. 

The EPA estimates that by 2010, the overall costs of complying with the program for businesses and consumers will be $1 billion to $2 billion a year, only one fourth of what was originally predicted. 

==Emissions of chemicals leading to acidification==
The most important gas which leads to acidification is sulfur dioxide. Emissions of nitrogen oxides which are oxidized to form nitric acid are of increasing importance due to stricter controls on emissions of sulfur containing compounds. 70 Tg(S) per year in the form of SO2 comes from fossil fuel combustion and industry, 2.8 Tg(S) from wildfires and 7-8 Tg(S) per year from volcanoes. Berresheim, H.; Wine, P.H. and Davies D.D., (1995). Sulfur in the Atmosphere. In Composition, Chemistry and Climate of the Atmophere, ed. H.B. Singh. Van Nostran Rheingold ISBN 

===Natural phenomena===
The principal natural phenomena that contribute acid-producing gases to the atmosphere are emissions from volcanoes. Thus, for example, fumaroles from Laguna Caliente crater of Poás Volcano create extremely high amounts of acid rain and fog with acidity 2 of pH, clearing an area of any vegetation and frequently causing irritation to the eyes and lungs of inhabitants in nearby settlements. 
Acid-producing gasses are created also by biological processes that occur on the land, in wetlands, and in the oceans. The major biological source of sulfur containing compounds is dimethyl sulfide.

Nitric acid in rainwater is an important source of fixed nitrogen for plant life, and is also produced by electrical activity in the atmosphere such as lightning.

Acidic deposits have been detected in glacial ice thousands of years old in remote parts of the globe. 

Soils of Coniferous forests are naturally very acidic due to the shedding of needles and this phenomenon should not be confused with acid rain.

===Human activity===
The coal-fired Gavin Power Plant in Cheshire, Ohio
The principal cause of acid rain is sulfur and nitrogen compounds from human sources, such as electricity generation, factories, and motor vehicles. Coal power plants are one of the most polluting. The gases can be carried hundreds of kilometers in the atmosphere before they are converted to acids and deposited. In the past, factories had short funnels to let out smoke but this caused many problems locally; thus, factories now have taller smoke funnels. However, dispersal from these taller stacks causes pollutants to be carried farther, causing widespread ecological damage.

==Chemical processes==
Combustion of fuels produces sulfur dioxide and nitric oxides. They are converted into sulfuric acid and nitric acid. Clean Air Act Reduces Acid Rain In Eastern United States, ScienceDaily, Sept. 28, 1998 

===Gas phase chemistry===
In the gas phase sulfur dioxide is oxidized by reaction with the hydroxyl radical via an intermolecular reaction: 
:SO2 + OH· → HOSO2·
which is followed by:
:HOSO2· + O2 → HO2· + SO3
In the presence of water, sulfur trioxide (SO3) is converted rapidly to sulfuric acid:
:SO3 (g) + H2O (l) → H2SO4 (l)

Nitrogen dioxide reacts with OH to form nitric acid:
:NO2 + OH· → HNO3

===Chemistry in cloud droplets===
When clouds are present, the loss rate of SO2 is faster than can be explained by gas phase chemistry alone. This is due to reactions in the liquid water droplets.

;Hydrolysis

Sulfur dioxide dissolves in water and then, like carbon dioxide, hydrolyses in a series of equilibrium reactions:

:SO2 (g) + H2O SO2·H2O
:SO2·H2O H+ + HSO3−
:HSO3− H+ + SO32−

;Oxidation

There are a large number of aqueous reactions that oxidize sulfur from S(IV) to S(VI), leading to the formation of sulfuric acid. The most important oxidation reactions are with ozone, hydrogen peroxide and oxygen (reactions with oxygen are catalyzed by iron and manganese in the cloud droplets). 

==Acid deposition==
===Wet deposition===
Wet deposition of acids occurs when any form of precipitation (rain, snow, and so on.) removes acids from the atmosphere and delivers it to the Earth's surface. This can result from the deposition of acids produced in the raindrops (see aqueous phase chemistry above) or by the precipitation removing the acids either in clouds or below clouds. Wet removal of both gases and aerosols are both of importance for wet deposition.

===Dry deposition===
Acid deposition also occurs via dry deposition in the absence of precipitation. This can be responsible for as much as 20 to 60% of total acid deposition. This occurs when particles and gases stick to the ground, plants or other surfaces.

==Adverse effects==
This chart shows that not all fish, shellfish, or the insects that they eat can tolerate the same amount of acid; for example, frogs can tolerate water that is more acidic (i.e., has a lower pH) than trout.
Acid rain has been shown to have adverse impacts on forests, freshwaters and soils, killing insect and aquatic life-forms as well as causing damage to buildings and having impacts on human health.

===Surface waters and aquatic animals===
Both the lower pH and higher aluminium concentrations in surface water that occur as a result of acid rain can cause damage to fish and other aquatic animals. At pHs lower than 5 most fish eggs will not hatch and lower pHs can kill adult fish. As lakes and rivers become more acidic biodiversity is reduced. Acid rain has eliminated insect life and some fish species, including the brook trout in some lakes, streams, and creeks in geographically sensitive areas, such as the Adirondack Mountains of the United States. US EPA: Effects of Acid Rain - Surface Waters and Aquatic Animals However, the extent to which acid rain contributes directly or indirectly via runoff from the catchment to lake and river acidity (i.e., depending on characteristics of the surrounding watershed) is variable. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) website states: "Of the lakes and streams surveyed, acid rain caused acidity in 75 percent of the acidic lakes and about 50 percent of the acidic streams". 

===Soils===
Soil biology and chemistry can be seriously damaged by acid rain. Some microbes are unable to tolerate changes to low pHs and are killed. Rodhe, H., et al. The global distribution of acidifying wet deposition. Environmental Science and TEchnology. vlo. 36, no. 20 (October) p. 4382-8 The enzymes of these microbes are denatured (changed in shape so they no longer function) by the acid. The hydronium ions of acid rain also mobilize toxins such as aluminium, and leach away essential nutrients and minerals such as magnesium. US EPA: Effects of Acid Rain - Forests 

:2 H+ (aq) + Mg2+ (clay) 2 H+ (clay) + Mg2+ (aq)

Soil chemistry can be dramatically changed when base cations, such as calcium and magnesium, are leached by acid rain thereby affecting sensitive species, such as sugar maple (Acer saccharum). Likens, G. E., C. T. Driscoll, D. C. Buso, M. J. Mitchell, G. M. Lovett, S. W. Bailey, T. G. Siccama, W. A. Reiners and C. Alewell. 2002. The biogeochemistry of sulfur at Hubbard Brook. Biogeochemistry 60(3):235-316. Likens, G. E., C. T. Driscoll and D. C. Buso. 1996. Long-term effects of acid rain: response and recovery of a forest ecosystem. Science 272:244-246. 

===Forests and other vegetation===
right
Adverse effects may be indirectly related to acid rain, like the acid's effects on soil (see above) or high concentration of gaseous precursors to acid rain. High altitude forests are especially vulnerable as they are often surrounded by clouds and fog which are more acidic than rain.

Other plants can also be damaged by acid rain, but the effect on food crops is minimized by the application of lime and fertilizers to replace lost nutrients. In cultivated areas, limestone may also be added to increase the ability of the soil to keep the pH stable, but this tactic is largely unusable in the case of wilderness lands. When calcium is leached from the needles of red spruce, these trees become less cold tolerant and exhibit winter injury and even death. DeHayes, D.H., Schaberg, P.G., and G.R. Strimbeck. 2001. Red Spruce Hardiness and Freezing Injury Susceptibility. In: F. Bigras, ed. Conifer Cold Hardiness. Kluwer Academic Publishers, the Netherlands. Lazarus, B. E., P. G. Schaberg, G. Hawley and D. H. DeHayes. 2006. Landscape-scale spatial patterns of winter injury to red spruce foliage in a year of heavy region-wide injury. Can. J. For. Res. 36:142-152. 

===Human health effects===
Acid rain does not directly affect human health. The acid in the rainwater is too dilute to have direct adverse effects. However, the particulates responsible for acid rain (sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides) do have an adverse effect. Increased amounts of fine particulate matter in the air do contribute to heart and lung problems including asthma and bronchitis. EPA, Effects of Acid Rain - Human Health, 5/13/2009 

===Other adverse effects===
right
Acid rain can also damage buildings and historic monuments and statues, especially those made of rocks, such as limestone and marble, that contain large amounts of calcium carbonate. Acids in the rain react with the calcium compounds in the stones to create gypsum, which then flakes off.

:CaCO3 (s) + H2SO4 (aq) CaSO4 (aq) + CO2 (g) + H2O (l)

The effects of this are commonly seen on old gravestones, where acid rain can cause the inscriptions to become completely illegible. Acid rain also increases the corrosion rate of metals, in particular iron, steel, copper and bronze. 

==Affected areas==
Places significantly impacted by acid rain around the globe include most of eastern Europe from Poland northward into Scandinavia, the eastern third of the United States, and southeastern Canada. Other affected areas include the southeastern coast of China and Taiwan.

==Prevention methods==
===Technical solutions===
Many coal-burning power plants use flue-gas desulfurization (FGD) to remove sulfur-containing gases from their stack gases. For a typical coal-fired power station, FGD will remove 95 percent or more of the SO2 in the flue gases. An example of FGD is the wet scrubber which is commonly used. A wet scrubber is basically a reaction tower equipped with a fan that extracts hot smoke stack gases from a power plant into the tower. Lime or limestone in slurry form is also injected into the tower to mix with the stack gases and combine with the sulfur dioxide present. The calcium carbonate of the limestone produces pH-neutral calcium sulfate that is physically removed from the scrubber. That is, the scrubber turns sulfur pollution into industrial sulfates.

In some areas the sulfates are sold to chemical companies as gypsum when the purity of calcium sulfate is high. In others, they are placed in landfill. However, the effects of acid rain can last for generations, as the effects of pH level change can stimulate the continued leaching of undesirable chemicals into otherwise pristine water sources, killing off vulnerable insect and fish species and blocking efforts to restore native life.

Vehicle emissions control reduces emissions of nitrogen oxides from motor vehicles.

===International treaties===
A number of international treaties on the long range transport of atmospheric pollutants have been agreed for example, Sulphur Emissions Reduction Protocol under the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. Canada and the US signed the Air Quality Agreement in 1991. Most European countries and Canada have signed the treaties.

===Emissions trading===

In this regulatory scheme, every current polluting facility is given or may purchase on an open market an emissions allowance for each unit of a designated pollutant it emits. Operators can then install pollution control equipment, and sell portions of their emissions allowances they no longer need for their own operations, thereby recovering some of the capital cost of their investment in such equipment. The intention is to give operators economic incentives to install pollution controls.

The first emissions trading market was established in the United States by enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. The overall goal of the Acid Rain Program established by the Act Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, 42 U.S. Code 7651 is to achieve significant environmental and public health benefits through reductions in emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxides (NOx), the primary causes of acid rain. To achieve this goal at the lowest cost to society, the program employs both regulatory and market based approaches for controlling air pollution.

==See also==
* Basic precipitation
* List of environmental issues
* Lists of environmental topics
* Rain dust (an alkaline rain)

==References==

==External links==
* National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program Report - a 98-page report to Congress (2005)
* Acid rain for schools
* Acid rain for schools - Hubbard Brook
* Acid Rain Retirement Fund environmental education links about acid rain
* United States Environmental Protection Agency - New England Acid Rain Program (superficial)
* Acid Rain (more depth than ref. above)
* U.S. Geological Survey - What is acid rain?
* Acid rain analysis - freeware for simulation and evaluation of titration curves and pH calculations
* CBC Digital Archives – Acid Rain: Pollution and Politics
* Larssen, Thorjørn et al. “Acid Rain in China”. Environmental Science and Technology, 40:2, 2006, pp 418-425.
* Acid Rain: A Continuing National Tragedy - a report from The Adirondack Council on acid rain in the Adirondack region (1998)
* Assortment of Summaries on Acid Rain
* Acid rain linked to decline of the wood thrush, a songbird of the Eastern Forest
* Trouble in the Forest, a 1988 documentary hosted by David Suzuki
* What Happens to Acid Rain?
* Acid Rain and how it affects fish and other aquatic organisms



[[Acephali]]

Acephali (from the Greek language a-, "without," and kephalos, "head") is a term applied to several sects as having no head or leader. 

In particular, the term refers to a strict monophysite sect that separated itself, in the end of the 5th century, from the rule of Peter Mongus, Patriarch of Alexandria, and remained "without king or bishop" until they were reconciled by Mark II (799 - 819).

The term is also used to denote clerici vagantes, i.e. clergy without title or benefice, picking up a living anyhow. Certain persons in England during the reign of King Henry I of England were called Acephali because they had no lands by virtue of which they could acknowledge a superior lord. 

The name is also given to certain legendary races described by ancient naturalists and 
geographers as having no heads, their mouths and eyes being in their breasts, generally identified with Pliny's Blemmyae. They live in Libya. 

==References==

==External links==
*



[[Anthony of Saxony]]

Anthony (Dresden, 27 December 1755 &ndash; Dresden, 6 June 1836), also known by his German name Anton (full name: Anton Clemens Theodor Maria Joseph Johann Evangelista Johann Nepomuk Franz Xavier Aloys Januar), Holborn, p. 24 was a King of Saxony (1827–1836) from the House of Wettin. He became known as Anton der Gütige, Quinger p. 35 (en: "Anthony the Kind"). " The Kings of Saxony". Accessed 27 January 2007. 

He was the fifth but third surviving son of Frederick Christian, Elector of Saxony, and Maria Antonia of Bavaria.

==Early life==
With few chances to take part in the politics of the Electorate of Saxony or receive any land from his older brother Frederick Augustus III, Anton lived under the shadows. No Elector of Saxony after Johann Georg I gave appananges to his younger sons.

During the first years of the reign of his older brother as Elector, Anton was the third in line, preceded only by his older brother Karl. The death of Karl (8 September 1781) make him the next in line to the Electorate as Crown Prince (de: Kronprinz); this was because all the pregnancies of the Electress Amalie, except for one daughter, ended in a stillbirth.
Caroline of Savoy.
Maria Theresa of Austria.

His aunt, the Dauphine of France, had wanted to engage her daughter Marie Zéphyrine of France to Anthony; Marie Zéphyrine died in 1755 abandoning plans. Another French candidate was Marie Zéphyrine's sister Marie Clotide (later Queen of Sardinia) but again nothing happened.

In Turin on 29 September 1781 (by proxy) and again in Dresden on 24 October 1781 (in person), Anton married firstly with the Princess Caroline of Savoy (Maria Carolina Antonietta Adelaida), daughter of the King Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia and Maria Antonietta of Spain. Caroline died after only one year of marriage, on 28 December 1782 having succumbed to smallpox. They had no children.

In Florence on 8 September 1787 (by proxy) and again in Dresden on 18 October 1787 (in person), Anton married a second time with the Archduchess Maria Theresia of Austria (Maria Theresia Josephe Charlotte Johanna), daughter of the Grand Duke Leopold I of Tuscany, later Emperor Leopold II. Mozart's opera Don Giovanni was originally intended to be performed in honor of Anton and his wife for a visit to Prague on 14 October 1787, as they traveled between Dresden and Vienna, and librettos were printed with dedication to them. The premiere could not be arranged in time, however, so the opera The Marriage of Figaro was substituted on the express orders of the bride's uncle, Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II. The choice of The Marriage of Figaro was considered improper for a new bride by many observers, and the couple left the opera theater early without seeing the entire work performed. Mozart complained bitterly of the intrigues surrounding this incident in a letter to his friend Gottfried von Jacquin that was written in stages between 15 October and 25 October 1787.

The couple had four children, but none survived to the age of two:
#Maria Ludovika Auguste Fredericka Therese Franziska Johanna Aloysia Nepomucena Ignatia Anna Josepha Xaveria Franziska de Paula Barbara (b. Dresden, 14 March 1795 - d. Dresden, 25 April 1796).
#Frederick Augustus (b. and d. Dresden, 5 April 1796).
#Maria Johanna Ludovica Anna Amalia Nepomucena Aloysia Ignatia Xaveria Josepha Franziska de Chantal Eva Apollonia Magdalena Crescentia Vincentia (b. Dresden, 5 April 1798 - d. Dresden, 30 October 1799).
#Maria Theresia (b. and d. Dresden, 15 October 1799).

The Electress gave birth for last time in 1797 to another stillborn child. After this Anton became, officially, the Heir to the Electorate and, since 1806, the Kingdom of Saxony.

==King of Saxony==
Anton succeeded his brother Frederick August I as King of Saxony when he died, on 5 May 1827. The 71-years-old new King was completely inexperienced in government, thus he had no intention of initiating profound changes in foreign or domestic policy.

Prussian diplomats discussed granting the Prussian Rhineland (predominantly Catholic) to Anton (a Catholic) in exchange for Lutheran Saxony in 1827, but nothing came of these talks. Freitag, p. 216 

After the July Revolution of 1830 in France, disturbances in Saxony began in autumn. These were directed primarily against the old Constitution. Therefore, on 13 September the cabinet dismissed Count Detlev von Einsiedel, followed by Bernhard von Lindenau. Because the people wished a younger regent, Anton agreed to appoint his nephew Frederick Augustus Prince Co-Regent (de: Prinz-Mitregenten). As another consequence of the disturbances, a new constitution was accepted in 1831 which came into effect on 4 September of that year. James K. Pollock & Homer Thomas, Germany in Power and Eclipse D. Van Nostrand Co.: New York, 1952) p. 510. With it Saxony became a Constitutional monarchy and obtained a bi-cameral legistature and a responsible ministry, which replaced the old feudal estates. Ibid. The constitution was more conservative than other constitutions existing at this time in the German Union. Still the constitution served Saxony until 1918. Ibid. The King kept his exclusive sovereignty but was bound by the Government Business to cooperate with the Ministers and the decisions of both Chambers of the States (de: Kammern der Ständeversammlung) meeting. The entry of Saxony into the Zollverein in 1833 let trade, industry and traffic blossom farther.

Without surviving male issue, Anton was succeeded as King by his nephew, Frederick Augustus II.

==Ancestors==

==Footnotes==

==References==

*

*

*



[[Albert III, Duke of Saxony]]

Albert III () (27 January 1443 – 12 September 1500) was a Duke of Saxony. He was nicknamed Albert the Bold or Albert the Courageous and founded the Albertine line of the House of Wettin.

Albert was born in Grimma as the third and youngest son (but fifth child in order of birth) of Frederick II the Gentle, Elector of Saxony, and Margarete of Austria, sister of Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor. Later, he was a member of the Order of the Golden Fleece.

After escaping from the hands of Kunz von Kaufungen, who had abducted him together with his brother Ernest, he spent some time at the court of the emperor Frederick III in Vienna.

In Eger (Cheb) on 11 November 1464 Albert married Zdenka (Sidonie), daughter of George of Podebrady, King of Bohemia; but failed to obtain the Bohemian Crown on the death of George in 1471.

After the death of his father in 1464, Albert and Ernest ruled their lands together, but in 1485 a division was made by the Treaty of Leipzig, and Albert received the Meissen, together with some adjoining districts, and founded the Albertine branch of the House of Wettin.

Regarded as a capable soldier by the emperor, Albert (in 1475) took a prominent part in the campaign against Charles the Bold, duke of Burgundy, and in 1487 led an expedition against Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary, which failed owing to lack of support on the part of the emperor.

In 1488 he was appointed Stadtholder of the Netherlands (until 1493) and marched with the imperial forces to free the Roman king Maximilian from his imprisonment at Bruges, and when, in 1489, the King returned to Germany, Albert was left as his representative to prosecute the war against the rebels. He was successful in restoring the authority of Maximilian in Holland, Flanders and Brabant, but failed to obtain any repayment of the large sums of money which he had spent in these campaigns.

His services were rewarded in 1498 when Maximilian bestowed upon him the title of Hereditary governor (potestat) of Friesland, but he had to make good his claim by force of arms. He had to a great extent succeeded, and was paying a visit to Saxony, when he was recalled by news of a fresh rising. Groningen was captured, but soon afterwards the duke died at Emden. He was buried at Meissen.

Albert, who was a man of great strength and considerable skill in feats of arms, delighted in tournaments and knightly exercises. His loyalty to the emperor Frederick, and the expenses incurred in this connection, aroused some irritation among his subjects, but his rule was a period of prosperity in Saxony.

==Ancestry==

+Albert's ancestors in three generations 
 
 Albert, Duke of Saxony Father:Frederick II, Elector of Saxony Paternal Grandfather:Frederick I, Elector of Saxony Paternal Great-grandfather:Frederick III, Landgrave of Thuringia 
 Paternal Great-grandmother:Catherine of Henneberg 
 Paternal Grandmother:Catherine of Brunswick Paternal Great-grandfather:Henry the Mild, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg 
 Paternal Great-grandmother:Sophie of Pomerania 
 Mother:Margaret of Austria Maternal Grandfather:Ernest, Duke of Austria Maternal Great-grandfather:Leopold III, Duke of Austria 
 Maternal Great-grandmother:Viridis Visconti 
 Maternal Grandmother:Cymburgis of Masovia Maternal Great-grandfather:Siemowit IV, Duke of Masovia 
 Maternal Great-grandmother:Alexandra of Lithuania 

==Family and children==
With his wife Sidonie, Albrecht had nine children:
# Katharina (b. Meissen, 24 July 1468 - d. Göttingen, 10 February 1524), married firstly on 24 February 1484 in Innsbruck to Duke Sigismund of Austria, and secondly on 1497 to Duke Eric I of Brunswick-Calenberg.
# Georg "der Bärtige" (b. Meissen, 27 August 1471 - d. Dresden, 17 April 1539).
# Heinrich V "der Fromme" (b. Dresden, 16 March 1473 - d. Dresden, 18 August 1541).
# Frederick (b. Torgau, 26 October 1474 - d. Rochlitz, 14 December 1510), Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights.
# Anna (b. Dresden, 3 August 1478 - d. Dresden, 1479).
# Stillborn child (1479).
# Louis (b. Torgau, 28 September 1481 - d. Torgau?, some days later / d. Torgau?, young after 1498) .
# John (b. and d. Torgau, 24 June 1484).
# John (b. Torgau, 2 December 1498 - d. Torgau?, some days later / d. Torgau?, young in September of the same year as his brother Louis) . I276588: Josepha Octavia Mlinaric 

==References==

*



[[Arlo Guthrie]]

Arlo Davy Guthrie (born July 10, 1947) is an American folk singer. Like his father, Woody Guthrie, Arlo often sings songs of protest against social injustice. One of Guthrie's better-known works is "Alice's Restaurant Massacree", a satirical talking blues song about 18 minutes in length.

==Early life==
Arlo Guthrie was born in Brooklyn, New York, the son of folk singer and composer Woody Guthrie and his wife Marjorie Mazia Guthrie. His sister is Nora Guthrie. His mother was a one-time professional dancer with the Martha Graham Company and founder of the Committee to Combat Huntington's disease, the disease that took her previous husband's life in 1967. His maternal grandmother was renowned Yiddish poet Aliza Greenblatt. Guthrie's mother was Jewish, and he received religious training for his bar mitzvah from Rabbi Meir Kahane, who would go on to form the Jewish Defense League. "Rabbi Kahane was a really nice, patient teacher," Guthrie later recalled, "but shortly after he started giving me my lessons, he started going haywire. Maybe I was responsible." Guthrie attended Woodward School in Clinton Hill Brooklyn 1st through 8th grades and later graduated from the Stockbridge School, in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, in 1965, and briefly attended Rocky Mountain College. He received an Honorary Doctorate from Westfield State College, in 2008.

As a singer, songwriter and lifelong political activist, Guthrie carries on the legacy of his legendary father. He was awarded the Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience award on September 26, 1992. The Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience Recipients List 

=="Alice's Restaurant"==
His most famous work is "Alice's Restaurant Massacree", a talking blues song that lasts 18 minutes and 34 seconds in its original recorded version. Guthrie has pointed out that this was also the exact length of one of the famous gaps in Richard Nixon's Watergate tapes. He has been known to spin the story out to forty-five minutes in concert. The Alice in the song is Alice Brock, who now runs an art gallery in Provincetown, Massachusetts.

The song lampoons the Vietnam War draft. However, Guthrie stated in a 2009 interview with Ron Bennington that the song is more an "anti-stupidity" song than an anti-war song, adding that it is based on a true incident. In the song, Guthrie is called up for a draft examination, and rejected as unfit for military service as a result of a criminal record consisting in its entirety of a single arrest, court appearance, fine and clean-up order for littering and creating a public nuisance on Thanksgiving Day in 1965, when Arlo was 18 years old. On the DVD commentary for the film, Guthrie states that the events presented in the song all actually happened.

For a short period of time after its release in 1967, "Alice's Restaurant" was heavily played on U.S. college and counter-culture radio stations. It became a symbol of the late 1960s and for many it defined an attitude and lifestyle that were lived out across the country in the ensuing years. Many stations across the States have made playing "Alice's Restaurant" a Thanksgiving Day tradition.

A 1969 film, directed and co-written by Arthur Penn, was based on the true story told in the song, but with the addition of a large amount of fictional scenes. This film, also called Alice's Restaurant featured Arlo portraying himself. However, the part of his father Woody Guthrie was played by an actor, Joseph Boley. 

Despite its popularity, the song "Alice's Restaurant Massacree" is not always featured on the set list of any given performance.

==Popular and critical reception==
From The Guthrie Family Legacy Tour 2007
In 1972 Guthrie made famous Steve Goodman's song "City of New Orleans", a paean to long-distance passenger rail travel. Guthrie's first trip on that train was in December 2005 (when his family joined other musicians on a train trip across the country to raise money for musicians financially devastated by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita, in the South of the United States). He also had a minor hit with his song "Coming into Los Angeles," which was played at the 1969 Woodstock Festival, and success with a live version of "The Motorcycle Song." Guthrie's 1976 album Amigo received a 5-star (highest rating) from Rolling Stone, and may be his best-received work; unfortunately that milestone album, like Guthrie's earlier Warner Bros. Records albums, is rarely heard today even though each boasts compelling folk and folk rock music accompanied by top-notch musicians such as Ry Cooder.

==Shenandoah==
In the fall of 1975 during a benefit concert in Massachusetts, Arlo Guthrie performed with his band Shenandoah in public for the first time. They continued to tour and record throughout the 1970s until the early 1990s. Although the band received good reviews, it never gained the popularity that Guthrie did while playing solo. This band is not to be confused with the popular country music group Shenandoah, an entirely different group that had musical hits from 1986 to 2006. Arlo Guthrie's band Shenandoah consisted (after 1976) of David Grover, Steve Ide, Carol Ide, Terry A La Berry and Dan Velika. 

A number of musicians from a variety of genres have joined Guthrie on stage, including Pete Seeger, David Bromberg, Cyril Neville, Emmylou Harris, Willie Nelson, Judy Collins, John Prine, Wesley Gray, Josh Ritter, and others.

==Acting==
Though Guthrie is best known for being a musician, singer, and composer, throughout the years he has also appeared as an actor in films and on television. The film Alice's Restaurant (1969) is his best known role, but he has had small parts in several films and even co-starred in a television drama, Byrds of Paradise.

Guthrie has had minor roles in several movies and television series. Usually, he has appeared as himself, often performing music and/or being interviewed about the 1960s, folk music and various social causes. His television appearances have included a broad range of programs from The Muppet Show (1979) to Politically Incorrect (1998). A rare dramatic film part was in the 1992 movie Roadside Prophets. Guthrie's memorable appearance at the 1969 Woodstock Festival was documented in the Michael Wadleigh film Woodstock. 

Guthrie also made a pilot for a TV variety show called "The Arlo Guthrie Show" in February, 1987. The hour-long program included story telling and musical performances and was filmed in Austin, Texas. It was broadcast nationally on PBS. Special guests were Pete Seeger, Bonnie Raitt, David Bromberg and Jerry Jeff Walker.

==Politics==
A registered Republican, Guthrie endorsed Texas Congressman Ron Paul for the 2008 Republican Party nomination. He said, "I love this guy. Dr. Paul is the only candidate I know of who would have signed the Constitution of the United States had he been there. I'm with him, because he seems to be the only candidate who actually believes it has as much relevance today as it did a couple of hundred years ago. I look forward to the day when we can work out the differences we have with the same revolutionary vision and enthusiasm that is our American legacy." He told The New York Times Magazine that he is a Republican because, "We had enough good Democrats. We needed a few more good Republicans. We needed a loyal opposition." 

About once a month, Guthrie posts short writings to the Announcements area of www.arlo.net, often sounding libertarian themes. However, on February 1, 2011, his post was to promote the cause of the public employee unions being opposed by Wisconsin Republicans, and to favor the cause of labor unions in general. Previously Guthrie had made comments in public disparaging musicians' unions and stating that he had refused to join one. 

In earlier years, at least from the 1960s to the 1980s, Guthrie had taken a decidedly leftist approach to American politics. In his often lengthy comments during concerts his expressed positions were consistently anti-war, anti-Nixon, pro-drugs and in favor of making nuclear power illegal. However, he apparently regarded himself as more an individualist than the major youth culture spokesperson he had been regarded as by the media, as evidenced by the lyrics in his 1979 song "Prologue": "I can remember all of your smiles during the demonstrations, ... and together we sang our victory songs though we were worlds apart." 

In 1984, he was the featured celebrity in George McGovern's campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination in Guthrie's home state of Massachusetts, performing at rallies and receptions. Marano, Richard Michael, Vote Your Conscience: The Last Campaign of George McGovern, Praeger Publishers, 2003, pp. 172 

==Legacy==
Like his father, Woody Guthrie, Guthrie often sings songs of protest against social injustice. He collaborated with poet Adrian Mitchell to tell the story of Chilean folk singer and activist Víctor Jara in song. He regularly performed with folk legend Pete Seeger, one of his father's longtime partners.

In 1991, Guthrie bought the church that had served as Alice and Ray Brock's former home in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, and converted it to the Guthrie Center, an interfaith meeting place that serves people of all religions. The center provides weekly free lunches in the community and support for families living with HIV/AIDS as well as other life-threatening illnesses. It also hosts a summertime concert series and Guthrie does six or seven fund raising shows there every year. There are several annual events such as the Walk-A-Thon to Cure Huntington's Disease and a "Thanksgiving Dinner That Can't Be Beat" for families, friends, doctors and scientists who live and work with Huntington's disease. 

==Family==
Guthrie and his wife Jackie reside in the Town of Washington, Massachusetts. Guthrie's son Abe Guthrie and his daughters Sarah Lee Guthrie and Cathy Guthrie have also become musicians. Annie Guthrie writes songs and performs, and also takes care of family touring details. Sarah Lee performs and records with her husband Johnny Irion. Cathy plays ukulele in Folk Uke, a group she formed with Amy Nelson, the daughter of Willie Nelson. Abe Guthrie was formerly in a folk-rock band called Xavier, and now tours with his father. Abe Guthrie's son, Krishna, is a drummer and toured with Arlo Guthrie on his European tour in 2006 and plays guitar for the 2009-2010 Tour. Krishna plays drums in Modest Me and aspires to be the lead of his own band some day. Arlo Guthrie is a grandfather of Abe's son Krishna and daughter Serena, Annie's son Shiva Das (Mo) and daughter Jacklyn, Sarah Lee's daughters Olivia Nora and Sophia Irion and Cathy's daughter Marjorie Maybelle Midwood.

==In fiction==

Arlo Guthrie is mentioned in Tim Winton's novel The Riders - shortlisted for the Booker Prize in 1995. A character in the novel overhears locals in the small Irish town of Shinrone, recount the night Arlo Guthrie came to play.
The actual event occurred in February 1988, when Arlo played the local gymnasium in Shinrone, County Offaly. The concert was organised by a local postman, Tom Stapleton.

==Works==
===Discography===
* Alice's Restaurant (1967)
* Arlo (1968)
* Running Down the Road (1969)
* Alice's Restaurant Soundtrack (1969)
* Washington County (1970)
* Hobo's Lullaby (1972)
* Last of the Brooklyn Cowboys (1973)
* Arlo Guthrie (1974)
* Together In Concert (1975), with Pete Seeger (2 record set), Warner/Reprise
* Amigo (1976)
* The Best of Arlo Guthrie (1977)
* One Night (1978)
* Outlasting the Blues (1979)
* Power Of Love (1981)
* Precious Friend (1982)
* Someday (1986)
* All Over the World (1991)
* Son of the Wind (1992)
* 2 Songs (1992)
* More Together Again (1994)
* Alice's Restaurant - The Massacree Revisited (1996)
* Mystic Journey (1996)
* (1997)
* "BanjoMan - a tribute to Derroll Adams" (2002)
* Live In Sydney (2005)
* In Times Like These (2007)
* 32¢ Postage Due (2008)
* Tales Of '69 (2009) 

===Select filmography===
* Alice's Restaurant (1969)
* Renaldo and Clara (1978)
* Baby's Storytime (1989)
* Roadside Prophets (1992)

===Notable television guest appearances===
*Beat Club (episode # 1.52) February 28, 1970
*Byrds of Paradise (1994)
*Relativity December 29, 1996
*Renegade in episode: "Top Ten with a Bullet" (episode # 5.14) January 24, 1997
*Rich Man, Poor Man: Book 2 2 episodes, 1976
*The fourth season of "The Muppet Show".

===Film and television composer===
*Alice's Restaurant (1969) (song "The Alice's Restaurant Massacree")
*Woodstock (1970) (song "Coming Into Los Angeles" - the song heard on the officially released soundtrack recording was not played at the Woodstock festival. Rather, it is a recording of a previous live presentation.)
*Clay Pigeon (1971) also known as Trip to Kill (UK)
*Baby's Storytime (1989)

===Producer===
*Isn't This a Time! A Tribute Concert for Harold Leventhal (2004)

===Writer===
*Mooses Come Walking (2004) (children's book) 

===Appearances as himself===
*Hylands hörna (episode # 4.4) January 31, 1970
*Woodstock (1969) (also known as Woodstock 25th Anniversary Edition and as Woodstock, 3 Days of Peace & Music)
*The Dick Cavett Show September 8, 1970
*Arthur Penn 1922-: Themes and Variants (1970) (TV)
*The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson playing "Himself" August 17, 1972
*The Muppet Show (episode # 4.8) June 19, 1979
*The Weavers: Weavers: Wasn't That a Time!|Wasn't That a Time] (1982)
*Woody Guthrie: Hard Travelin (1984)
*Farm Aid '87 (1987) (TV)
*A Vision Shared: A Tribute to Woody Guthrie and Leadbelly (1988)
*Woodstock: The Lost Performances (1990)
*Woodstock Diary (1994) (TV)
*The Kennedy Center Honors: A Celebration of the Performing Arts (1994) (TV)
*The History of Rock 'N' Roll, Vol. 6 (1995) (TV) (also known as My Generation)
*This Land Is Your Land: The Animated Kids' Songs of Woody Guthrie (1997)
*Healthy Kids (1998) (TV series)
*The Ballad of Ramblin' Jack (2000)
*Hollywood Rocks the Movies: The Early Years (1955–1970) (2000) (TV)
*Last Party 2000 (2001) (also known as The Party's Over)
*Pops Goes the Fourth! (July 4, 2001)
*NPR's Talk of the Nation radio broadcast (Nov. 14, 2001)
**St. James Infirmary and The City Of New Orleans
*Singing in the Shadow: The Children of Rock Royalty (2003)
*Get Up, Stand Up (2003) (TV series)
*From Wharf Rats to the Lords of the Docks (2004)
*Isn't This a Time! A Tribute Concert for Harold Leventhal (2004)
*1968 with Tom Brokaw (2007)
*Pete Seeger: The Power of Song (2008) (American Masters PBS TV special)
*The 84th Annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade (2010) (TV special)

==Footnotes==

==References==
* Lee, Laura, Arlo, Alice & Anglicans: The Lives of a New England Church (Berkshire House Publishers, 2000; W.W. Norton, 2000 paperback ISBN 1-58157-010-4)
* Massachusetts Foundation for the Humanities' Mass Moments: "Arlo Guthrie Convicted of Littering," November 28, 1965"
* "Youths Ordered to Clean Up Rubbish Mess": contemporaneous news article reprinted in This is the Arlo Guthrie Songbook p. 39 (offline)

==External links==
*
*
*Arlo Guthrie's Rising Son Records
*
*Audio 2007 Interview on the Horace J. Digby Report, Ann Arbor, Michigan
*Audio from April 2007 interview
*The Guthrie Center
*World Music Central "Arlo Guthrie"
*YouTube video of Alice's Restaurant
*YouTube video of the Motorcycle Song

Arlo



[[Book of Alma]]

The Book of Alma is one of the books that make up the Book of Mormon. The full title is The Book of Alma: The Son of Alma. The title refers to Alma the Younger, a prophet and "chief judge" of the Nephites.

==Content==
===Historical Outline===

The Book of Alma is the longest of all the books of the Book of Mormon, consisting of 63 chapters. The book records the first 39 years of what the Nephites termed "the reign of the judges", a period in which the Nephite nation adopted a constitutional theocratic government in which the judicial and executive branches of the government were combined.

The history of the book is outlined as follows:

====Challenges to the Beginning of the Republic====
The first four chapters, describe the rebellions of followers of Nehor and Amlici. Contrary to the dominant lay ministry that existed in the Nephite culture, Nehor established a church in which priests were given a separate social status and were paid for their ministry. After killing a religious leader during a theological argument, Nehor was tried and executed for his crimes. The followers of Amlici resented the dominant political and religious parties and sought to reestablish the monarchy that the reign of the judges replaced. Alma, the chief judge and governor as well as the high priest over the people of Nephi, lead an army against Amlici and his followers and drove the rebellion out of the land.

====The Ministry of Alma Among the Nephites====
Towards the end of chapter four, Alma realizes that the affairs of the Church require his entire concentration. He resigns from his political office and appoints Nephihah as chief judge and governor of the land. Chapters 5-16 record sermons and missionary travels of Alma between 83 and 78 B.C. Alma and one of his converted followers, Amulek, provide important teachings about the atonement of Christ, overcoming pride and the natural man, retaining conversion, the resurrection of all men, and judgment day. Later, their teachings about faith and worship in Alma 32-34 are important sources of instruction and insight.

====The Ministry of the Sons of Mosiah Among the Lamanites====
Chapters 17 to 27 describe the missionary labors of the sons of King Mosiah II who was the last king over the people of Nephi prior to the peaceful transition of the nation from a monarchy to a republican form of government. The sons of Mosiah, named Ammon, Aaron, Omner and Himni, chose to devote themselves to missionary labors preaching to the people of the Lamanite nation, which periodically went to war against the Nephite nation. They lived and taught among the Lamanites between the years 91 and 77 B.C.

====The Ministry of Alma Among the Zoramites====
Chapters 28 to 35 relate the account of a rebellion of a subgroup of the Nephite nation who called themselves Zoramites. The Zoramites believed in a form of predestination and taught that all others except their people would be damned. Their apostasy from the Church was conjoined with plans to rebel against the Nephite government. Alma took two of his sons, the sons of Mosiah, Amulek, and Zeezrom on a mission among the Zoramites in an attempt to restore their loyalty to both the Church and the state. Alma and his companions had some success among the poor class of Zoramites who were then exiled from the Zoramite community by the governing rich class of Zoramites. The wealthier Zoramites eventually defected and united with the Lamanites.

====The Commandments of Alma to his Children====
Chapters 36 to 42 record the teachings of Alma to his sons, Helaman, Shiblon, and Corianton. These teachings discuss the ministry and atonement of Jesus, the laws of justice and mercy, the need for repentance, and the resurrection and judgment of all people.

====A Period of War====
Captain Moroni raises the "Title of Liberty"
Chapters 43 to 62 record the struggles of the Nephite people during a war against the attacking Lamanite nation between the years of 74 and 57 B.C. The Chief Captain (senior military commander) of the Nephites during this time was Captain Moroni. The Nephites were ultimately successful in their defense against the Lamanites.

====Conclusion====
Chapter 63 includes concluding historical notes covering the years 56 to 53 B.C. This is largely a period of post-war reconstruction and exploration in the Nephite nation.

===Simple Outline===

This outline is based on main sections and antagonist characters in the Book of Alma. There are two main features in this history, chapters 1 - 42 deal with Missionary Work, and chapters 43 - 63 contain the Wars. The history of the Zoramites provides a transition from Missionary Work to the War chapters of the Book of Alma. The two main sections also mirror the first two antagonist characters, Nehor (religious agenda) and Amlici (political agenda).

*Mission Chapters ( see Alma 1-42 )
**Nehor: rebels against the Church ( see Alma 1 )
**Amlici: rebels against the Republic ( see Alma 2 )
**Korihor: the AntiChrist ( see Alma 30 )

*The Zoramites ( see Alma 31 - 43 )
**Zoram: the Apostate Nephites religious ( see Alma 31 )
**Zerahemnah: the war leader of the Zoramites political (see Alma 43 )

*War Chapters (see Alma 43-63 )
**Amalickiah: the man who wants to be king (see Alma 46 )
**Ammoron: the vengeful brother of Amalickiah ( see Alma 52 )

==Characters==

===Protagonist===
*Alma the Younger
*Gideon
*Nephihah
*Sons of Mosiah
**Ammon
**Aaron3
**Omner
**Himni
*Amulek
*Zoram2
*Ammon
*Melek
*Lehonti
*Helaman
*Shiblon
*Corianton
*Captain Moroni
*Two thousand stripling warriors
*Teancum
*Laman4
*Gid
*Teomner
*Pahoran
*Hagoth
*Moronihah